Abala .
Abbhakṣāḥ .
Abhagnaparisaṅkhyāna, the great spirit. b, .
Abhagnayoga = No. .
Abhāsura = No. .
Ābhāsurāḥ, a class of gods .
Abhaya .
Abhibhū, king of Kāśi Vibhu. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Abhigamya = Śiva .
Abhijit, the nd of the nakṣatras, when beginning with Aśvinī .
Abhijita, the eighth hour of the day . a nakṣatra .
Abhimanyor bhāryā = Uttarā.
Abhimanyu, son of Arjuna and Subhadrā, sister of Kṛṣṇa, is an incarna tion of Varcas, son of Soma, wherefore he enters Soma after death, after his Karman has elapsed etymology of his name he is the vaṃśakara of the Pāṇḍavas . In the beginning of the exile of the Pāṇḍavas he is carried to Dvārakā with his mother by Kṛṣṇa, where he is educated and protected by Raukmiṇeya . After the elapse of the exile he joins the Pāṇḍavas in Upaplavya with Kṛṣṇa and Subhadrā, and is there married to Uttarā, daughter of king Virāṭa . He fights bravely in the great battle, until he on the when enjoined by Yudhiṣṭhira to break Droṇas cakravyūha, is surrounded and killed by Jayadratha and his people, leaving his wife Uttarā with a yet unborn son, Parikṣit, the only one left to propagate the race of the Pāṇḍavas. At first he is not seen in Heaven by Yudhiṣṭhira, but later he is shown to him beside Soma in Heaven . l, . g, . st day of the battle, . nd day of the battle, . rd . . . . . . . . . . . Ārjuni, Saubhadra, Kārṣṇi, Arjunātmaja, Arjunāvara, Phālguni, Śakrātmajātmaja.
Abhimanyuja, .
Abhimanyujananī, .
Abhimanyuvadha = Abhimanyuvadha parvan.
. The day Broken by Arjuna, and Droṇa having failed to seize Yudhiṣṭhira, the Kurus were regarded as defeated they heard all praising Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa. Next morning Duryodhana blamed Droṇa for not having seized Yudhiṣṭhira Droṇa said that even As G Y N and Rā. cannot defeat the force protected by Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa, save Mahādeva but to day he would slay a mighty car warrior. The Saṃśaptakas challenged Arjuna and took him away to the southern side of the field. Abhimanyus slaughter by Duḥśāsanas son is alluded to by Sañjaya. Dhṛtarāṣṭra grieves. Sañjaya relates . Sañjaya praises Yudhi ṣṭhira, etc. . Droṇa had formed the great circular array Lakṣmaṇa at their head Duryodhana, etc. in the middle at the head the commander Droṇa, etc. . The Pāṇḍavas were headed by Bhīmasena Sātyaki, etc. Droṇa, whom the Pāñcālas and the Sṛñjayas could not approach. Yudhi ṣṭhira says that only Abhimanyu, etc can break the array of Droṇa, and orders Abhimanyu to it Bhīma, etc. followed him praised by Yudhiṣṭhira, who says that the protectors of Droṇas host resemble S R M or Agni, or Āditya, Abhimanyu orders his charioteer Sumitra to urge the steeds towards Droṇas army . Abhimanyu, etc Droṇa, etc. Abhimanyu breaks that part of the Kuru army many steeds of the Vanāyu, etc breeds were deprived of their ornaments, and caused delight to Rā etc. . Duryodhana Abhimanyu Droṇa, etc. Abhimanyu rescuing Duryodhana Duḥsaha, etc Abhimanyu, who slew the heir of Aśmaka Karṇa, etc Abhimanyu, who slew Suṣeṇa, etc and defeated Śalya Droṇas troops fled P Cā Si etc glorify Abhimanyu . Abhimanyu slays Śalyas younger brother, whose followers fled. Abhimanyu, with the weapons he has received from Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, defeats all the warriors that encounter him. Droṇas army fled . Abhimanyu Droṇa, etc. . Droṇa says that Abhimanyu delights Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. . Duryodhana told Karṇa, etc to crush Abhimanyu, whom they attacked Duḥśāsana Abhimanyu Abhimanyu addresses Duḥśāsana Duḥśāsana is borne away by his charioteer the Pāṇḍavas, etc uttered leonine shouts, and attacked Droṇas array. Karṇa . Abhimanyu when Karṇa is in great distress his younger brother encounters Abhimanyu . Abhimanyu slays Karṇas younger brother Karṇa flies the Kaurava array breaks, except the Sindhu king . Yudhiṣṭhira, etc endeavour to follow Abhimanyu. Jayadratha checks them with celestial weapons. Dhṛtarāṣṭra enquires of Sañjaya about the source of Jayadrathas energy Sañjaya narrates the boon obtained by Jayadratha from Śiva . Jayadratha vanquishes all the Pāṇḍava leaders with his steeds of the Sindhu breed Sātyaki, etc. Bhīma mounts the car of Sātyaki the path made by Abhimanyu is closed up notwithstanding the Matsyas, etc. they are all checked by Jayadratha . Abhimanyu vanquished Vṛṣasena, who was borne away from the battle, and slew Vasāliya and many others . Abhimanyu seized Satyaśravas and routed the Kurus Rukmaratha Abhi manyu, who slew him and his friends with the Gāndharva weapon, though they were assisted by Duryo dhana, who was filled with fear and fled . Droṇa, etc Abhimanyu, who beats them back except Lakṣmaṇa, who is slain. Duryodhana urged the troops to slay Abhimanyu Droṇa, etc encompassed Abhimanyu, who seeks Jayadratha Krāthas son was slain, the others fled . Droṇa, etc Abhimanyu Yudhiṣṭhira supporting Jayadratha Karṇa has one ear cut off Abhimanyu slew Vṛndāraka and Bṛhadbala Abhimanyu once more pierced Karṇa in the ear, and slew the son of the Magadha king, and Aśvaketu, and the Bhoja prince of Mārttikāvata the son of Duḥśāsana Abhimanyu Aśvatthāman Abhimanyu Śalya, who mounts another car Abhimanyu slew Śatruñjaya, etc. Abhimanyu Śakuni, who tells Duryodhana to take counsel with Droṇa and Kṛpa, etc about the means of slaying Abhimanyu Karṇa asks Droṇa about the means of slaying Abhimanyu Droṇa, saying that he is gratified by Abhimanyus prowess, tells Karṇa, who is very afflicted with arrows, to cut off his bow, etc. Karṇa then cut off Abhimanyus bow, Kṛtavarman slew his steeds, and Kṛpa slew his two Pārṣṇi charioteers Abhimanyu, then attacked by six car warriors, fights with the sword, which is cut off by Droṇa, while Karṇa cut off his shield then Abhimanyu fought with a wheel then with a mace Abhimanyu Aśvatthāman Abhimanyu slew Subalas son Kālikeya, and slew Gāndhāra followers of his, and Brahma Vasātīyas, Kaikayas, and elephants Abhimanyu Duḥśāsanas son, who slays Abhimanyu. Invisible creatures censure the cowardly act of the Kurus, headed by Droṇa and Karṇa. The Pāṇḍava divisions fly, but are rallied by Yudhiṣṭhira . In the evening the Kurus withdrew to their encampment. Rā. and Pś etc on the field of battle . Yudhiṣṭhira laments on the fall of Abhimanyu . Vyāsa comes and consoles him, relating to him the ancient story of what Nārada had said in days of old to Akampana . This story is purifying, etc. cast off thy grief Abhimanyu has attained to heaven sprung from Soma, he has disappeared in the lunar essence, cleansed from all his impurities . Vyāsa recites to Yudhi ṣṭhira the story of Sṛñjaya, to whom Nārada told Ṣoḍaśarājika . Vyāsa says that Abhimanyu has attained to that eternal goal which is attained by Yogins, and those that are living in heaven never prefer this world to heaven it is the living that stand in need of our grief, and not those who have attained to heaven his sins increase for whom the living grieve. Then Vyāsa disappeared, and Yudhiṣṭhira became free from grief but what shall we say to Arjuna .
Ābhīra, a people in the west of India upon the Indus are conquered by Nakula at his Digvijaya bring tribute to Yudhiṣṭhira . Mārkaṇḍeya prophesies that in the Kali yuga there shall be many Ābhīra and other barbarous kings . The Ābhīras are mentioned by Sañjaya in the enumeration of the people of Bhāratavarṣa, . They are placed in the eyes of Droṇas Suparṇavyūha on the twelfth day of the battle, . From hatred towards them the Sarasvatī disappeared at Vinaśana, . They have become śūdras, having omitted their duties of kṣattriyas from fear of Paraśurāma, . When Arjuna, after the catastrophe at Dvārakā, is conducting the wives, children, and the old men from thence to Indraprastha, the Ābhīras attack him when he has arrived at Pañcanada, and rob most of the women, .
Abhirāma = Śiva .
Abhirāmā, v. Pūrvābhirāmā.
Abhīru, a king, who was an incarnation of the sixth of the eight Asuras of the family of the Kāleyāḥ, .
Abhisāra, a people . Together with other barbarous tribes they fight Arjuna on the day of the great battle, . They are mentioned by Kṛṣṇa among the auxiliaries of Duryodhana, on the day of the battle.
Abhīsāra, enumerated by Sañjaya among the people of Bhāratavarṣa, .
Abhisārī, a town conquered by Arjuna on his Digvijaya, .
Abhiṣāha, a people with other barbarous tribes they attack Arjuna at the instigation of Duḥśāsana on the day of the great battle, . .
Abhīṣāha, a people first day of the battle, . . . . After the .
Ābhiṣecanika parva, i.e .
Abhiṣyanta, the second of the five sons of Kuru and Vāhinī, .
Abhivādya = Śiva
Acala1, brother in law of Dhṛtāraṣṭra, brother of Śakuni, .
Acala2, a warrior of Skandas, .
Acala3 = the Great Spirit, .
Acala4 = Viṣṇu .
Acalā, a mātṛ, .
Acalendra, .
Acalopama = Śiva .
Ācārya1 = Droṇa, .
Ācārya2 = Kṛpa, .
Ācārya3 = Paraśurāma, .
Ācāryamukhya = Droṇa, .
Ācāryanandana = Aśvatthāman, .
Ācāryaputra = Aśvatthāman, .
Ācāryasattama1 = Kṛpa, .
Ācāryasattama2 = Aśvatthāman, .
Ācāryasuta = Aśvatthāman, .
Ācāryatanaya = Aśvatthāman, .
Ācāryau = Droṇa and Kṛpa, .
Acintya1 = Śiva .
Acintya2 = Viṣṇu, .
Acyuta a proper name of Kṛṣṇa, etc. Viṣṇu identified with Kṛṣṇa, . ānuja. an adjective, applied to a great many persons .
Acyutānuja = Bhīmasena, .
Acyutāyus, a warrior always named together with Śrutāyus they attack and wound Arjuna, but are slain by him their sons will avenge them, but are likewise slain by Arjuna, .
Aśanin = Śiva .
Āśāvaha1, according to the expla nation of Nīlakaṇṭha, either a synonym of Vāyu, the tenth of the twelve sons of Heaven and Vivasvat, viz the geniuses of the ten senses and Mind together with Mahya, who are all manifestations of the one Son of Heaven, or a Vivasvat or form of the Sun .
Āśāvaha2, a prince, who has presented himself at the self choice of Kṛṣṇā.
Aśiva, a form of Agni in the enumeration of Mārkaṇḍeya .
Aśleṣā, a nakṣatra on the day of the dark half of the month Kārttika, when the moon is in conjunction, with Aśleṣā, a brahman, kṣattriya, vaiśya, or śūdra may, after having fasted at a śrāddha, after the setting of the sun, deposit an offering of black clothes and unguents with flowers in an ant hill, begging the serpents to hand it over to the world elephants to increase their strength that it may be equal to the strength of Viṣṇu, when he lifted up Earth the formula is contained in vv. this he should for a whole year.
Aśleṣāḥ = No .
Aśma, praises Bhīṣma on his arrow couch.
Aśmaka1, a rājarṣi, son of Vaśiṣṭha and Madayantī, the wife of Kalmāṣapāda, .
Aśmaka2, a brahman present at the deathbed of Bhīṣma, .
Aśmaka3, a king of the Aśmakāḥ, .
Aśmakadāyāda, .
Aśmakāḥ, a people, No. .
Aśmakeśvara, .
Aśmakī, a Yādavī, the wife of king Prācinvat and mother of Saṃyāti, .
Aśman, a brahman consulted by Janaka Vaideha, .
Aśmapṛṣṭha, a holy stone in Gayā, a visit to which expiates the murder of a brahman, s, . Pret Silā exists at the present day. It is not a stone, but a rocky hill some or feet high.
Aśoka1, a king, .
Aśoka2 = Viṣṇu .
Aśokatīrtha, a tīrtha or holy place in the south, .
Āśrama = Viṣṇu .
Āśramanivāsa i.e. Āśramavāsīkaparvan.
Āśramapūjita = Śiva .
Āśramastha = Śiva .
Āśramasthāna i.e. Āśramavāsikaparvan.
Āśramavāsa1 = Āśrama vāsaparvan .
Āśramavāsa2 = Āśramavāsikaparvan .
the of the minor parvans of Mhbhr. . Asked by Janamejaya how the Pāṇḍavas, having acquired their king, conducted themselves towards Dhṛtarāṣṭra, how Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Gāndhārī behaved, and for how many years his grandfather ruled the king, Vaiśampāyana said The Pāṇḍavas ruled, placing Dhṛtarāṣṭra at their head Vidura, Sañjaya, and Yuyutsu used to wait upon Dhṛtarāṣṭra for years they did all things under the advice of the old king Kuntī obeyed Gāndhūrī Draupadī and Subhadrā, etc showed the utmost respect for the old king and his queen the Pāṇḍavas surrounded the old king and his queen with every luxury, and Maireya wines, etc. Kṛpa waited upon Dhṛta rāṣṭra Vyāsa frequently visited him and recited histories of old Ṛ celestial ascetics, P and Rā. Vidura, under the orders of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, superintended religion and law through his policy the Pāṇḍavas obtained numerous services from their feudatories and followers Dhṛtarāṣṭra liberated prisoners and pared those condemned to death the old king, on his pleasure excursions, was supplied with everything by Yudhiṣṭhira the kings who came to Hāstinapura waited upon Dhṛtarāṣṭra as before Kuntī, etc served Gāndhārī like maidservants Bhīmasena alone did not forget his grievances Dhṛtarāṣṭra was honoured by Ṛ and used to make gifts to the brahmans in rites for P. and śrāddhas for his sons, etc. Dhṛtarāṣṭra also felt great affection for the Pāṇḍavas, and so did Gāndhārī Gāndhārī performed śrāddhas with gifts grieved at the remembrance of Duryodhana, Dhṛtarāṣṭra every morning blessed the Pāṇḍavas, wishing them victory in battle, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira became very much liked by all the four castes, and forgot the wrongs inflicted upon him by Dhṛtarāṣṭras sons from fear of Yudhiṣṭhira nobody dared to speak evil of Duryodhana or Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Bhīma, however, reverenced the old king outwardly, with a very unwilling heart . While there was no variance in the cordiality between Yudhiṣṭhira and Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the latter could not but feel unfriendly towards Bhīma, and Bhīma, recollecting his foes Duryodhana, Karṇa, and Duḥśāsana, indulged in boastful language about Duryodhana and his brothers whom he had slain. Gāndhārī was not moved. After years Dhṛtarāṣṭra, afflicted by the wordy darts of Bhīma, became penetrated with despair and grief Yudhiṣṭhira, etc did not know it. Dhṛtarāṣṭra opened his heart to his friends now he was observing a vow of fast, which he had concealed from Yudhiṣṭhira, lying on the earth clad in deerskin Gāndhārī observed similar vows now he asked Yudhiṣṭhiras permission for himself and Gāndhārī to retire into the woods clad in rags and bark in order to practise austerities. Yudhiṣṭhira lamented but Dhṛtarāṣṭras resolution remains unaltered he asked Sañjaya and Kṛpa to speak for him to Yudhiṣṭhira leaning on Gāndhārī he looked like one deprived of life Yudhiṣṭhira lamented, and gently rubbed Dhṛtarāṣṭras breast and face with cold water and revived him by the touch of his hand, on which were jewels and medicinal herbs. Dhṛtarāṣṭra said that the touch of Yudhiṣṭhira was highly gratifying, embraced him, and smelt his head Vidura, Kuntī, etc wept Gāndhārī bore her sorrow with fortitude. Dhṛta rāṣṭra renewed his request Vyāsa came and asked Yudhiṣṭhira to permit Dhṛtarāṣṭra to follow the path of all the ancient R. ṛ. Gāndhārī bears her grief with fortitude. Yudhiṣṭhira yielded to Vyāsas intercession Vyāsa summed ap the reasons for Dhṛtarāṣṭras retirement, and then proceeded to the woods. Yudhiṣṭhira then said that he would conform to the advice of Vyāsa, etc. Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Gāndhārī, etc entering the palace of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, ate a little. Then Dhṛtarāṣṭra gave Yudhiṣ ṭhira advice about how the latter should rule his king . Continuation . Continuation agreeably to the science known to Uśanas, Śakaṭa, Padma, and Vajra should be formed thou hast been instructed in all duties by Bhīṣma, Kṛṣṇa, and Vidura horse sacrifices and righteous rule are productive of equal merit . Yudhiṣṭhira gratefully accepted his instruc tions, as Bhīṣma, etc no longer were there to instruct him. Dhṛtarāṣṭra wishes to depart soon, and Gāndhārī reminded him that he has got the permission of Vyāsa, and asks him when he would go to the forest with the permission of Yudhiṣṭhira he wished first to make gifts for the advance ment in the other world of his dead sons and other kinsmen, and assembled all the subjects, while Yudhiṣṭhira brought all the articles necessary Dhṛtarāṣṭra, in a touching address, took leave of that large concourse of men of all the four castes, recapitulating the history of the realm from Śāntanu nwards . The citizens were exceedingly agitated upon hearing Dhṛta rāṣṭras address they charged the learned brahman Śāmba with answering him King Duryodhana never did us any wrong we were well protected and ruled by him we have also enjoyed great happiness for thousands of years under Yudhiṣṭhira, who follows the conduct of the R. ṛ. of old the carnage on the field of Kurukṣetra was not brought about by Duryo dhana, Karṇa, and Śakuni, nor by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, but by Destiny, which in days caused akṣauhiṇīs to be destroyed by Bhīṣma, etc. the Pāṇḍavas are capable of ruling without either thee or ourselves to look after them Kuntī, etc will not the least wrong to the people. Then Dhṛtarāṣṭra slowly dismissed the assembly, and entered his house with Gāndhārī . After that night had passed away, Dhṛtarāṣṭra sent Vidura to Yudhiṣṭhira in order to announce that he would set out for the woods on the coming day of the full moon in the month of Kārttika, and to solicit some wealth for performing the śrāddha of Bhīṣma, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira and Arjuna applauded his words Bhīma was unwilling, recollecting Duryodhana Arjuna sought to pacify him, applauded by Yudhiṣṭhira Bhīmasena maintained that gifts for Bhīṣma, etc should be given by them, and by Kuntī for Karṇa Let Duryodhana, etc sink from a miserable to a more miserable position, reminding his brothers of the woes and disgrace inflicted upon them by those for whose benefit Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked for wealth . Yudhiṣ ṭhira rebuked him . Arjuna urged Bhīma to forget the injuries. Yudhiṣṭhira said to Vidura that he would give Dhṛtarāṣṭra so much wealth as he wished for the obsequies of his sons and Bhīṣma, etc and asked him to tell Dhṛta rāṣṭra not to be angry with Bhīmasena . Vidura reported the speeches of Yudhiṣṭhira, Arjuna, and Bhīma to Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Dhṛtarāṣṭra expressed his satisfaction, and set his heart on making large presents on the day of full moon in the month of Kārttika . Dhṛtarāṣṭra invited thousands of deserving brahmans superior Ṛ. for Bhīṣma, etc. and made large gifts to them, naming Droṇa, etc. tellers and scribes appointed by Yudhiṣṭhira ceaselessly ask the old king as to what should be given to each recipient that presented himself unto him that was to receive a were given, and he who was to receive was presented with, at the command of Yudhiṣṭhira this was given by Dhṛtarāṣṭra for the benefit in the other world of his sons and grandsons, as also of himself and Gāndhārī the ation lasted for days . On the day of full moon in the month of Kārttika Dhṛtarāṣṭra summoned the Pāṇḍavas, caused the rites to be performed, and his sacred fire to be taken up, put on deerskins and bark, and set out with his daughters in law. The ladies uttered loud wails Yudhiṣṭhira and Arjuna were pierced with grief Bhīmasena, etc all followed Dhṛtarāṣṭra Kuntī held on her shoulders the hand of Gāndhārī, who walked with her bandaged eyes Dhṛtarāṣṭra walked behind Gāndhārī, placing his hand on her shoulder Kṛṣṇā, etc all proceeded with Dhṛta rāṣṭra the citizens of all orders were as distressed as they had been at the departure of the Pāṇḍavas after the match of dice Dhṛtarāṣṭra left the city through the principal gate, and then asked those who followed him to desist. Vidura and Sañjaya retired with him into the woods Kṛpa and Yuyutsu he caused to remain, and made them over to Yudhiṣṭhira. Kuntī retired with Dhṛtarāṣṭra, though Yudhiṣṭhira sought to dissuade her she said Never show any disregard for Sahadeva he is very much attached to me, and to thee also then she reminded him of Karṇa, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira reminded her that she had herself formerly recited to them the story of Vidulā, when they were about to set out from the town, and that they had won sovereignty guided by her words com municated through Kṛṣṇa. Also Bhīma dissuaded her, pointing out the grief of the sons of Mādrī but in vain. Draupadī and Subhadrā followed her, and so did the Pāṇḍavas with all their wives and attendants Kuntī addressed them, assigning her reasons for her conduct . The Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī then desisted from following her. The Pāṇḍavas circumambulated Dhṛta rāṣṭra, etc for taking their leave to return. Dhṛtarāṣṭra made a final effort of dis suading Kuntī from retiring into the forest with him, but in vain. The ladies set up a loud wail of grief. Hāstinapura became plunged into sorrow no festivals were observed. The Pāṇḍavas were without any energy. Dhṛtarāṣṭra arrived on the banks of the Bhāgīrathī and took rest there for the night among the brahmans, who there, like himself, ignited their sacred fires arrangement of the beds of Vidura, etc. the Yājaka brahmans, etc of the king laid themselves n on their respective beds that night seemed as delightful to them as a Brāhmī night. When the night had passed away Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc going through their morning acts and rites, continue their journey . Following the advice of Vidura, Dhṛtarāṣṭra took up his abode on the banks of the Bhāgīrathī many of the four orders came to see him he gladdened them all by his words. At evening Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc bathed in the stream, etc. Kuntī led him and Gāndhārī. Then he proceeded to Kurukṣetra to the retreat of R. ṛ. Śatayūpa, who received him with due rites accompanied by him he proceeded to the retreat of Vyāsa, where he received the initiation after having returned he took up his abode in the retreat of Śatayūpa, who instructed him in all the rites of the forest mode of life, at the command of Vyāsa. Dhṛta rāṣṭra, etc began to practise austerities . Ṛ. Nārada, etc came there and gladdened Dhṛtarāṣṭra with discourses on religion. Ṛ. Nārada mentioned the kings that attained to heaven after practising penances in that very retreat Sahasracitya, Śailālaya, Pṛṣadhra, Purukutsa, Śaśaloman Thou also wilt, with Gāndhārī, through the grace of Vyāsa, attain to a very high goal dwelling in the presence of Indra, Pāṇḍu always thinks of thee, and will assist thee in the attainment of prosperity Kuntī, by serving thee and Gāndhārī, will obtain residence with her husband in the other world we behold all this with our spiritual vision Vidura will enter into Yudhiṣṭhira Sañjaya will ascend to Heaven. Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc praised Nārada. Śatayūpa asked Nārada what regions will be acquired by Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Nārada said On a visit to Indra saw Pāṇḍu Indra said that after three years Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Gāndhārī would go to the abode of Kubera, on a car moving at will, and he would rove through the regions of G and Rā. this is a mystery of the gods. All the persons present became highly pleased. Then they went away by the path of the Siddhas . The anxiety of the Pāṇḍavas and citizens about the fate of Dhṛta rāṣṭra, etc and their despair when they reflected on that terrible slaughter of their kinsmen only Parikṣit somehow consoled them afflicted with grief, they failed to derive pleasure from anything, nor did they attend to their kingly offices, thinking of Kuntī and Gāndhārī. They set their heart upon seeing Dhṛtarāṣṭra in his forest retreat. Sahadeva, lamenting the fate of Kuntī, and ex pressing his longing to see her, proposed a visit to the woods, supported by Draupadī, who mentioned Kuntī and Gāndhārī and Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Yudhiṣṭhira caused his army to be equipped, ordered litters, etc for the ladies, and proclaimed that they would march out to morrow, permitting the citizens to follow them. The next morning they set out, then waited five days for such citizens as would accompany them, and then proceeded towards the forest, headed by Arjuna and Kṛpa Bhīma on a gigantic elephant, the twins on two fleet steeds, the ladies in closed litters, scattering showers of wealth as they proceeded, headed by Draupadī. They proceeded slowly. Yuyutsu and Dhaumya protected the city. They reached Kurukṣetra, crossed the Yamunā, and approached the retreat of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . The Pāṇḍavas and their followers, alighting from their cars, walked on foot the ascetics told them that Dhṛtarāṣṭra had gone to the Yamunā for his ablutions, etc and pointed out the way to them. Sahadeva ran with speed towards Kuntī they both wept she informed Gāndhārī, and then advanced towards Yudhiṣṭhira, etc dragging the childless old couple the Pāṇḍavas fell n at their feet, and took from their hands the jars of water they were carrying. Yudhi ṣṭhira presented all his followers one after another to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, mentioning their names and races. Dhṛta rāṣṭra rejoiced and went to his retreat that was applauded by Si. and Cā. . To the ascetics, who had come from various regions in order to see the Pāṇḍavas, Sañjaya pointed out each of them then Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Yudhiṣṭhira about the welfare of the Pāṇḍavas and their devotion to P. and . Yudhiṣṭhira answered, enquiring after Vidura, who turned out to be engaged in penances, subsisting on air alone, and was now seen at a distance with matted locks, and gravel in his mouth, and exceedingly emaciated, naked, and besmeared with filth and dust Vidura fled, pursued by Yudhiṣṭhira at last he stood motionless in yoga, and entered the body of Yudhiṣṭhira, who felt that he had become stronger than before and had acquired many additional virtues and accomplishments, and recollected his own state before his birth among men he had heard of yoga practice from Vyāsa. He desired to cremate the lifeless body of Vidura, but was prevented by an invisible voice which said, that in Vidura was Yudhiṣṭhiras body also, and that Vidura would attain to the regions called Santānikāḥ. Yudhiṣṭhira came and informed Dhṛtarāṣṭra all became filled with wonder. They passed that night under a tree, conversing on morality and wealth. The next morning they surveyed the retreat and the other retreats in the forest. Yudhiṣṭhira made presents to the ascetics then he returned to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc. many M. ṛ. who dwelt in Kurukṣetra came there, as also Vyāsa, who enquired after Dhṛtarāṣṭras, etc welfare, and told them who Vidura was, mentioning the curse of Dharma by Māṇḍavya he was superior to Bṛhaspati and Śukra and how Vyāsa had procreated him upon the soil of Vicitravīrya he was Dharma in consequence of his practices of dhāraṇā and dhyāna from Dharma also Yudhiṣṭhira took his birth. Vyāsa says that he has come to show a wonderful effect of his own penances what t thou wish to see, or ask, or hear .
Āśramavāsikaparva i.e. Āśramavāsikaparvan.
the of the greater parvans of Mhbhr. Āśramanivāsaparvan, Āśramasthāna, Āśrama vāsa2, Āśramavāsika parva.
Āśrāvya, .
Aśva1, a Dānava, .
Aśva2 = Śiva .
Aśvacakra
Aśvaśaṅku, brother of Aśva, Ayaḥśaṅku.
Aśvaśiras1, brother of Aśva, is incarnated as a king among the Kaikeyas, .
Aśvaśiras2 = Viṣṇu, these quotations are from the chapter Nārā yaṇīya, where it is related how Viṣṇu, assuming a horse headed form, rescued the Vedas from the Dānavas Madhu and Kaiṭabha . placed the horse head in the north eastern sea, killed Madhu and Kaiṭabha, and gave the Vedas back to Brahmán that he might create the worlds.
Aśvaśiras3, the horse headed form of Viṣṇu, .
Aśvaśiras4, a sacred place, .
Aśvagrīva1, brother of Aśva, incarnated as king Rocamāna, .
Aśvagrīva2, a rājarṣi = Hayagrīva, . As to Aśvaśiras and Aśvagrīva, VP and BR. s.v. Hayagrīva.
Aśvaka, plur a people, LIA .
Aśvaketu, son of the Magadha king, killed by Abhimanyu on the day of the battle.
Aśvakranda, .
Aśvalāyana, a son of Viśvāmitras, .
Aśvamedha i.e. Āśvamedhika parvan.
Aśvamedhadatta, .
Aśvamedheśvara, a king in the East subdued by Bhīma .
Aśvamedhika i.e. Āśvamedhika parvan.
Aśvamedhika parva . Vaiśampāyana said After Dhṛtarāṣṭra had offered libations of water, Yudhiṣṭhira fell n in grief on the bank of Gaṅgā. Incited by Kṛṣṇa, Bhīma took him up, surrounded by the Pāṇḍavas Dhṛtarāṣṭra comforts him, saying that it is he and Gāndhārī who ought to grieve, and referring to Viduras advice about abaning Duryodhana and his warnings against Karṇa and Śakuni . Kṛṣṇa also exhorts him, referring to the duties of the kṣattriyas expounded by Bhīṣma, Vyāsa, Nārada, and Vidura. Yudhiṣṭhira cannot forget the slaughter of Karṇa. Vyāsa also comforts him, and reminding him that . and As. perform sacrifices, and that by sacrifices . vanquished Dā he urged him to perform the Rājasūya, the Horse sacrifice, the Sarva medha, and the Naramedha the Horse sacrifice after the example of Rāma Dāśarathi and Bharata Dauṣmanti, and indicated to him a spot in the Himavat, where there was gold in abundance, left behind by the brahmans at the sacrifice of Marutta of the Karandhama race. Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Vyāsa told the history of Marutta i.e. Saṃvartta Maruttīya . Vaiśampāyana said Yudhiṣṭhira was delighted at hearing the speech of Vyāsa, and desirous of performing his sacrifices with those riches, he consulted with his ministers . Vaiśampāyana said When Vyāsa had concluded his speech, Kṛṣṇa addressed Yudhiṣṭhira, saying that Yudhiṣṭhiras karman has not yet been annihilated, nor had his foes been subjugated How canst thou be ignorant of the enemies in thy own flesh and related the history of Indras war with Vṛtra . Kṛṣṇa then expounds that, as physical ailments and health depend on the distribution of the cold, warm, and windy of the body, so the mental ailments and health depend on sattva, rajas, and tamas in the soul happiness is overcome by sorrow, and sorrow by pleasure Yudhiṣṭhira should not recall his past sorrows Kṛṣṇā in the assembly, etc. the time has now come when thou must fight single handed with thy mind salvation is not attained by foregoing external things Mṛtyu is mine, and the eternal Brāhman is not mine as no creature is ever destroyed, ahiṃsā may exist even when one has pierced body, and vice versa the yogin knows yoga to be the perfect way, on account of the practices of his many former births quoting the old verses sung by Kāma no creature is able to destroy me without the methods ... . Vaiśampāyana said Thus Yudhiṣṭhira was consoled, exhorted by Viṣṭaraśravas, etc. and having again performed the obsequial rites for his relatives, etc he ruled the earth. He said to Vyāsa, Nārada, etc that he would now perform the sacrifice, and said that they would go to the Himālaya under the protection of Vyāsa, according to the words of Vyāsa, . ṛ. Nārada, and Devasthāna. Then M. ṛ. took leave of Yudhiṣṭhira, Kṛṣṇa, and Arjuna. A short time passed away while they performed their purifications after Bhīṣmas death, and gave large gifts to the brahmans as śrāddha to the Kurus Bhīṣma, Karṇa, etc accompanied by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and then they entered the city of Hāstinapura . Asked by Janamejaya what Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna did when the Pāṇḍavas had reconquered and pacified their king, Vaiśampāyana said When the Pāṇḍava king had been conquered and pacified K. and A. travelled with great pleasure amidst picturesque sceneries, like Indra and his wife in heaven, or like the Aśvins in Nandana, and entered the palace of Indraprastha in great merriment, reciting the genealogies of Ṛ. and gods, etc and Kṛṣṇa consoled Arjuna for the death of his relatives . It was long since he had seen Vasudeva, Baladeva, and the Vṛṣṇi heroes he, therefore, asked leave to go to Dvāravatī, and to accompany him to Yudhiṣṭhira and apprise him of his departure. Arjuna sorrowfully replied, Be it so .
Āśvamedhika parva i.e. Aśvamedhika parva.
.
Aśvanadī, a river upon which Pṛthā set the new born Karṇa in a chest .
Aśvapati1, brother of Aśva1, incarnate as king Hārdikya, .
Aśvapati2, a king of the Madras, father of Sāvitrī, .
Aśvarāja1 = Ucchaiḥśravas
Aśvarāja2, .
Aśvarathā, a river on the mountain Gandhamādana, near the hermitage of Ārṣṭiṣeṇa, .
Aśvasena, a Scrpent, .
Aśvātaka, plur a people in the army of Duryodhana, .
Aśvatara1, in the Mhbhr. only appearing in the compound Kambalāau a pair of Serpents, .
Aśvatara2, a tīrtha, .
Aśvatīrtha, a holy place on the Gaṅgā in the neighbourhood of Kanyākubja, where Varuṇa gave to Ṛcīka steeds as a ry to Gādhi, . VP .
Aśvattha1, one of the names of the Sun in the enumera tion of Dhaumya .
Aśvattha2 = Śiva .
Aśvattha3 = Viṣṇu .
Aśvatthāman1, son of Droṇa and Kṛpī . b . b, . ii fights Sātyaki ʹ, ʹ, . Ācāryanandana, Ācāryaputra, Ācāryasuta, Ācāryatanaya, Ācāryasattama, Drauṇi, Drauṇāyani, Droṇaputra, Droṇasūnu, Guruputra, Guroḥsuta, Aṅgirasāṃ variṣṭhaḥ, Bhāratācāryaputra.
Aśvatthāman2, an elephant belonging to the Mālava king Indravarman and killed by Bhīma to delude Droṇa and make him believe that his son had been killed .
Aśvavatī, a river .
Āśvayuj, a month = Āśvayuja or Āśvina .
Āśvayuja, adj Āśvayuj and No. Āśvina he who then practises austerities, confining himself to one meal a is born pure and rich in carriages and sons.
Aśvin, the surgeons of the gods they are, because of their beauty, often mentioned in comparisons . u, . Nāsatyau Aśvinīsutau Sūryaputrau bhiṣajau Aśvibhyāṃ pati .
Āśvina Nos. and it is the sixth month of the solar year beginning with Vaiśākha, or the seventh of the luni solar year beginning with Caitra see Whitney to Sū Si, and, .
Āśvineya1 = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Āśvineya2 = Sahadeva .
Aśvinī, a nakṣatra, the first of the younger series, the twenty seventh of the older, beginning with Kṛttikā . Aśvinī.
Aśvinī, a tīrtha .
Aśvinīsutau = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Aśvisutau = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Aḍambara, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Adambha = Śiva .
Ādāna, a name of Earth .
Adāntanāśana = Śiva .
Adbhuta1, a name of Fire .
Adbhuta2 = Viṣṇu .
Adhana = Śiva .
Adhara = Śiva .
Ādhāranilaya = Viṣṇu .
Adharma .
Adharmahan = Śiva .
Adharṣaṇa = Śiva .
Adhidaiva, .
Adhideva = Kṛṣṇa, .
Adhirājan, v. Indra.
Adhirājyam and Adhirājakuśādyaḥ, see Adhivājyakulādyaḥ.
Adhiratha, a sūta in the neighbourhood of Campā and friend of Dhṛtarāṣṭra husband of Rādhā and foster father of Karṇa, whom he called Vasuṣeṇa and sent to Hāstinapura to be instructed by Droṇa at the show of arms he enters the arena to congratulate Karṇa as king of Aṅga .
Ādhirathi = Karṇa, .
Adhiroha = Śiva .
Adhiṣṭhāna = Viṣṇu .
Adhivājyakulādyaḥ, a country VP .
Adhivaṅga, a tīrtha .
Adhokṣaja1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Adhokṣaja2 = Viṣṇu .
Adhṛta = Viṣṇu .
Adhyakṣa, .
Adhyātmānugata = Śiva .
Ādi = Śiva .
Ādidevānām1 = Śiva .
Ādidevānām2 = Viṣṇu, .
Ādiviśvasya = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ādideva1 = the Sun, .
Ādideva2 = Viṣṇu, .
Ādideva3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ādikara1 = Śiva .
Ādikara2 = Viṣṇu, .
Adīna = Śiva .
Ādiparvan, the first book of Mhbh .
Ādirāja, third son of Avikṣit and grandson of Kuru .
Aditeḥ putra = Varuṇa, .
Aditeḥ suta = the Sun, .
Āditeya, the gods, .
Aditi1, one of the thirteen daughters of Dakṣa, who were married to Kaśyapa by him she is mother of the twelve Ādityas . u, Aditi cooked food for the gods, hoping that, having eaten it, they would kill the Asuras there Budha...said to her, Give me alms she, saying that it was only to be eaten by the gods, gave him nothing, wherefore he cursed her, saying that she would have a pain vyathā in her womb in the second birth as an egg of Vivasvat, the egg of his mother Aditi was killed therefore Vivasvat Śrāddhadeva became Mārttaṇḍa. also, v. infra . Devamātṛ, Śiva.
Aditi2, the same identified with a sickness demon .
Aditi3, the same conceived as a manifestation of Śiva .
Aditinandanau, .
Āditya1, a class of gods, the sons of Aditi and Kaśyapa, manifestations of the Sun . They are twelve, enumerated, etc. etc. etc. BR. s.v and Muir, Or. S.T especially iv, pp the youngest and most important is Viṣṇu Indra is the principal, and the oldest and best is Varuṇa, . For their superintendence of the chariot of the Sun, each in one of the twelve months of the year, in the Purāṇas, see VP pp. ff. the order is, Indra, Parjanya instead of Savitṛ, . Of the older conception of six, seven Ādityas there seems to be no trace in the Mhbh unless it be, they came into existence from the coals at the sacrifice of Śiva in the shape of Varuṇa, . In most cases they are named together with the other devagaṇas, etc. thus, for instance, v.s . bis, cf cf . u, etc etc. . Kāśyapeyāḥ.
Āditya2, the gods in general, .
Āditya3, plur the seven Suns that shall scourge the world at its dissolution and prepare the way for the Saṃvartaka fire, .
Āditya4, the Sun, . See Sūrya.
Āditya5, a Viśvadeva, .
Āditya6 = Varuṇa, .
Āditya7 = Viṣṇu, .
Āditya8 = Śiva, .
Āditya9, .
Ādityaketu, one of the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Ādityanandana = Karṇa, .
Ādityanayana = Śiva, .
Ādityaparvata, the hermitage of Śiva, .
Ādityapatha = the sky, .
Ādityapati = Viṣṇu, .
Ādityapratima = Śiva, .
Ādityatanaya1 = Manu, .
Ādityatanaya2 = Karṇa, .
Āditya tīrtha, upon the Sarasvatī. ee, . There Sūrya, having performed a sacrifice, obtained the sovereignty of all luminous bodies and acquired his great energy. There, on the bank of the river, . with . M G Aps Vyāsa, Śuka, Kṛṣṇa, Y Rā Pś etc always reside. There Viṣṇu, having in days of yore slain As. Madhu and Kaiṭabha, had performed his ablutions. Vyāsa, having bathed in that tīrtha, obtained great Yoga powers and success . And R. Asita Devala, having bathed in that tīrtha with soul rapt in Yoga, obtained great Yoga powers.
Ādityavaktra = Śiva, .
Ādityavarṇa = Śiva, .
the fifth chapter of the Ādivaṃśāvatāraṇaparvan, it includes Vasu Uparicara and his sons. Girikā. Matsya. Vyāsa and his pupils. Bhīṣma. Aṇīmāṇḍavya. Sañjaya Karṇa. Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva. . Birth of Sātyaki and Kṛtavarman, Droṇa, Kṛpī, Kṛpa, Aśvatthāman, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, Kṛṣṇā, Nagnajit, and Subala, Śakuni, Gāndhārī, and Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Pāṇḍu, and Vidura, and Yudhiṣṭhira and his brothers, and the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, of whom are enumerated as mahārathas, and Abhimanyu, and the sons of Pāñcālī, and Ghaṭotkaca, and Śikhaṇḍi these are only the principal ones of the hundreds of thousands of monarchs who came to fight against each other in that great battle of the Kurus.
Ādivaṃśāvatāraṇa2 = parvan .
Ādivaṃśāvatāraṇaparvan . Kathā bandha in the intervals of the duties of the snake sacrifice Vyāsa recited Mahābhārata. Kathānubandha . Hearing that Janamejaya was installed in the snake sacrifice, Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana went thither with his disciples, and asked by Janamejaya about the Kurus and Pāṇḍavas, he directed his disciple Vaiśampāyana to tell their story. Bhāratasūtram . Vaiśampāyana gives a survey of the history of the Pāṇḍavas. Bhāratapraśaṃsā . Janamejaya wishes to hear the Mahābhārata in full. Vaiśampāyana describes its virtues Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana had attained his object in three years, rising daily and purifying himself and performing his ascetic devotions he had composed this Mahābhārata he that gives away a copy of the Bhārata to one that asks for it s indeed make a present of the whole earth with her belt of seas. Vide Ādivaṃśāvatāraṇa . Jamadagnis son, after having twenty one times destroyed the kṣattriya race, began ascetic penances on the Mahendra mountain. A new kṣattriya caste sprang from the kṣattriya ladies and the brahmans. Description of the Kṛta yuga. Then the Daityas being repeatedly defeated by the Ādityas and deprived of heaven, the Asuras began to be born on Earth in such numbers that the Earth became incapable of supporting herself, even with the united strength of the Pannagas . The Earth then applied to Brahmán, who was surrounded by gods, brahmans, great Ṛṣis, Gandharvas, and Apsarases. Brahmán appointed the gods, Gandharvas and Apsarases, to be born on Earth in order to ease her of her burthen by destroying the Asuras. They agreed, and going to Vaikuṇṭha they also prevailed upon Nārāyaṇa to become incarnate.
Adri1, son of Viśvagaśva, descendant of Ikṣvāku .
Adri2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Adrijā, a river, .
Adrikā, an Apsaras, cursed by Brahmán to become a fish when dwelling in the Yamunā river she drank the semen of Uparicara, was caught by a fisherman, and gave birth to Matsya and Satyavatī .
Adṛśya = Viṣṇu .
Adṛśyantī, wife of Śaktri and daughter in law of Vasiṣṭha, and mother of Parāśara .
Adṛḍha, son of Jarāsandha .
Ādya1 = Śiva .
Ādya2 = Viṣṇu, .
Ādya3, a tīrtha upon the Sarasvatī .
Ādya Puruṣa = Viṣṇu, .
Ādyastuti = Śiva .
Agama = Śiva .
Agastya1, a ṛṣi, brother of Vasiṣṭha and son of Mitra and Varuṇa he is called Maitrāvaruṇi and Kumbhayoni he once saw his ancestors hanging in a cave, and was urged by them to procure progeny he then from the most beautiful parts of all animals created Lopāmudrā and let her become the daughter of the king of Vidarbha when he had married her he, in order to procure riches for her, applied successively to three kings, and then to the Dānava Ilvala, who shaped his own younger brother into a he goat that was digested by Agastya. Agastya had a son by Lopāmudrā named Dṛḍhasyu or Idhmavāha. A. prevailed upon the Vindhya mountain to cease to increase in height till he had returned from the South, and drunk up the Sea, in order that the gods might overcome the Kālakeyas . v.s . k Once the gods were vanquished by As. their sacrifices and the svadhā of P. were robbed, and so also the sacrifices of men. Wandering over the earth they met the brahman Agastya, who at their request burned Dā who, abaning both the worlds, fled to the South. The Dā. king Bali was performing a horse sacrifice in the nether regions the great As who were under and in the earth, were not burned, and A. could not destroy them, lest his penances should suffer a diminution. Name thou a kṣattriya that is superior to A . e, In olden days A devoted to the good of all creatures, entered into a dīkṣā for twelve years many hotṛs were engaged . A. obtained the food required by lawful means. Numerous ascetics at that time performed large sacrifices as A how ever, was engaged in his, Indra did not pour rain. During the intervals of the sacrifice the Mu. spoke about this A. said that if Indra did not pour rain during those twelve years he would perform the mental sacrifice, or the touch sacrifice, or other sacrifices then A. by his words caused all wealth in the three worlds, all Aps G Ku Viśvāvasu, etc the wealth of the Northern Kurus, Heaven, the gods, and Dharma, to come to the place of his sacrifice Ṛ. praised him, but did not wish that his penances should suffer any diminution. Indra poured rain and came with Bṛhaspati and pacified A. After the completion of the sacrifice, A. duly worshipped those great Mu. and dismissed them, . Compare Kumbhayoni, Maitrāvaruṇi, Mitra Varuṇayoḥ putra. Bṛhaddevatā, . ff see BR.
Agastya2, might allude to a brahman of Agastyas race, named Śarmin yet, the epithet bhagavān naturally leads the thought upon Agastya himself BR. takes śarmiṇaṃ to be an adjective happy.
Āgastya1, patron .
Āgastya2, adj. ākhyāna = Agastyopākhyāna .
Āgastya3, adj. saras, a tīrtha .
Agastyaśiṣya .
Agastyāśrama .
Agastyaparvata .
Agastyatīrtha .
Agastyavaṭa, a place in or near the Himālaya .
In the city of Maṇimatī there lived formerly a Daiteya Ilvala, whose younger brother was Vātāpi . Ilvala, inflamed with wrath against all brahmans, because a brahman had refused to grant him a son equal to Indra, used to transform Vātāpi into a ram and offer his flesh to brahmans as food, and then to recall him to life, and Vātāpi, ripping the flanks of the brahmans, would come out laughing. Thus they killed many brahmans. Meanwhile Agastya saw his ancestors hanging in a hole with the heads nwards, and was asked by them to procure offspring to them. As he did not see any wife worthy of himself, he selected the most beautiful parts from various creatures and created an excellent woman, whom he caused to be born as the daughter of the Vidarbha king, who was then undergoing ascetic penances for obtaining offspring. She was named Lopāmudrā, and was very beautiful. When she attained to puberty no one dared to ask for her hand . When Agastya asked the Vidarbha king to bestow her upon him, the king and his queen became much afflicted, but at her own request Lopāmudrā was bestowed upon Agastya, who im mediately asked her to discard her ornaments and dress herself in rags and barks and deer skins and partake of his vows, and proceeding to Gaṅgādvāra they practised the severest penances. When at last he summoned her for marital intercourse she made it a condition that he should approach her on a bed like to that which she had in the palace of her father, and that both should be aned with costly ornaments, and she told him to procure these things without impairing his ascetic merit . Agastya then went to King Śrutarvan and asked him for wealth, but seeing that his expenditure was equal to his income, he took nothing, but, together with Śrutarvan, went to King Bradhnaśva, with the same result then all three went to King Trasadasyu Paurukutsa of the line of Ikṣvāku, with the same result. At the suggestion of the three kings they all four went to Ilvala . Ilvala went out with his ministers to receive them on the confines of his ain. He prepared the flesh of Vātāpi in order to entertain them, at which the kings became sad, but Agastya ate it all, and when Ilvala summoned Vātāpi there came only air out of Agastyas stomach, Vātāpi having already been digested. Then Ilvala, becoming sad, promised to give them wealth if Agastya could tell him what he intended to give, and Agastya rightly said that he intended to give each of the kings, cows and as many gold coins, and to Agastya twice as much, and a car that would be found to be a golden one, with two steeds . The car brought Agastya and the kings to Agastyas hermitage within the twinkling of an eye. Then the rājarṣis went away to their cities. When Agastya proposed to Lopāmudrā to choose between sons, or each equal to, or each equal to, or equal to, she chose the last alternative. After she had conceived he retired into the forest. After seven years she gave birth to Drḍhasyu, who came out as if repeating the Vedas with the Upaniṣads and Aṅgas and from carrying, while yet a child, loads of sacrificial fuel to the hermitage of his father, he was called Idhmavāha. Agastya was highly pleased, and his ancestors obtained the lokas they desired. In the kṛta age the Dānava tribes named Kālakeyas under Vṛtra pursued the gods under Indra. The gods, on the suggestion of Brahmán, with Nārāyaṇa at their head, proceeded to the hermitage of the ṛṣi Dadhīca on the other bank of Sarasvatī, and having prevailed upon him to leave his body, they caused Tvaṣṭṛ to construct of his bones the six sided vajra which Tvaṣṭṛ handed to Indra that he might slay Vṛtra with it . In the encounter that ensued between the gods and the Kālakeyas the gods were defeated, until Nārāyaṇa, the gods, and the brahmarṣis had transferred their own vigour to Indra. He then hurled the vajra against Vṛtra and slew him so that he fell headlong like the Mandara mountain hurled of yore from Viṣṇus hand but Indra fled in fear, desiring to take shelter in a lake, thinking that the vajra had not been hurled from his hand and that Vṛtra was still alive, while the gods defeated the Dānavas, who fled to the depths of the sea. Here they conspired for the destruction of the three worlds, and resolved upon destroying all who were possessed of ascetic virtues, for so the universe would itself be destroyed, as it is supported by asceticism . Remaining in the depths of the sea by the Kāleyas during the night slew the munis in the hermitages and sacred spots in the hermitage of Vasiṣṭha, ascetics in that of Cyavana, in that of Bharadvāja, without being seen every morning people saw the dead bodies and mutilated limbs of the munis and the disturbed agnihotras scattered on the ground. Men fled for their lives into all directions or killed themselves from fear. Some brave bowmen searched in vain for the evilrs. The gods with Indra repaired to Nārāyaṇa . They did not know by whom the brahmans were being killed during the night. Viṣṇu explained the whole affair to them, and told them to apply to Agastya that he might dry up the sea, as no one else was capable of so ng. They then went to the hermitage of Agastya, and mentioned to him that he had delivered the gods from Nahuṣa and caused Vindhya to cease to increase in height, the world having been covered with darkness . Vindhya . At the request of the gods Agastya, accompanied by ṛṣis, gods, men, Uragas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, and Kimpuruṣas, approached the ocean and drank it up, to the amazement of the gods, who called him Vidhātṛ and the creator of the worlds, while the musical instruments of Gandharvas were playing, and celestial blossoms were showered upon him. The Kāleyas, who had previously been burnt by the tapas of the munis, were now destroyed by the gods, except some few who, rending asunder the goddess Earth, sought refuge in Pātāla. The gods now asked Agastya to fill up the ocean again, but he had already digested the water. The gods with Viṣṇu came to Brahmán and spoke to him about replenishing the sea . Brahmán dismissed them, saying that only after a long course of time the ocean would be brought to resume its wonted state by the agnates of king Bhagīratha.
Agāvaha, a Vṛṣṇi hero .
Aghamarṣaṇa, a ṛṣi .
Aghaṇṭa = Śiva .
Aghaṇṭaghaṇṭin = Śiva .
Aghoraghorarūpa = Śiva .
Āgneya1 .
Āgneya2, astram. b, .
Āgneya3, nakṣatra .
Āgneya4, ukṣan. .
Āgneya5, Mātaraḥ. u, .
Āgneya6, patron = Skanda, .
Āgneya7, patron, .
Āgneya8, patron, .
Āgneya9 .
Agni . b, . b, f. . b, identified with the Sun, . c, among the names of the Sun . ff . a, . g f, f, . b, etc. . a, Agni says that he dwells within the bodies of all creatures. b, . shows interest for Arjuna, allusion to one of Arjunas preceptors in arms, . f, they with Bṛhaspati, Uśanas, M Y Ā S Sapt Viśvāmitra, Aps etc worship Brahmán, DeathPratijñāp.Ghaṭotkacavadhap.samaprabhaṃsurā iva nir agnayaḥNārāyaṇāstra mokṣap.agnāv agnir iva nyastoyathā jagdhvā jagat kṛtsnaṃ samaye sacarācaraṃgacched agnir Vibhor āsyaṃsūryam agniḥ praviṣṭaḥ syād yathā cāgniṃ divākaraḥVāgagnīTripurākhyānaśṛṅgam Agnir babhūvāsya, i.e. on the arrow of MahādevaAgnī ṣomau jagat kṛtsnaṃKarṇap.Śakrāgnibhyām iva M S R Vi A Agnir Indraś ca Somaś ca Pavano tha diśo daśaDhañanja yasya te pakṣeŚalyap.bhagavānr ivayathāGadāyuddhap.Khāṇḍave gnim ivārjunaḥ broughtīn, from Dvārakā by BalarāmaSkandaBṛhaspatiḥ samid dhāgnau juhāvāgniṃ yathāvidhiśaktyā... dattayā, i.e. the lance of SkandaBaladevat.ḥ praṇaṣṭo bhagavānIndro gnir Aryamā caiva yatra prāk prītim āpnuvan, i.e. on the YamunāRājadh.hantāi.e. Kṛṣṇaantarbhūtaḥ, i.e. KṛṣṇaRāmop.having got alms from Arjuna Kārtavīrya, A. burnt villages, etc and the hermitage of ĀpavaRājadh.v. Āditya4ajo gnir Varuṇo meṣaḥ...na vikreyaḥ kathañcana =, VibhāvasuḥKhaḍgotp.Aser daivataṃKrṭaghnop.Viśve devāḥ sāgnayaḥ, etc repre sented by brahmans fed in the house of Virūpākṣa on a certain day of the Kārttika monthBhṛgu Bharad vāja s.Agni Mārutau, spring from waterAgni Māruta saṃyogāt tataḥ samabhavan mahīis Brahmáns tejasAgnī Ṣomau tu candrārkau nayane tasya, i.e. Brahmáns, viśruteBali Vāsava s.āhuś cainam, i.e. Brahmán, kecid Agniṃ kecid āhuḥ PrajāpatiṃVṛtravadhain order to deliver Indra from the brahmahatyā that issued from the body of Vṛtra, when he had been killed by Indra, Brahmán divided it in four portions one fourth was taken by Agni on the condition that it should immediately enter the man who should abstain from offering, etc.MSNSt.= Śiva, namesMokṣadh.Agnī Ṣomāv idaṃ sarvaṃv. Ādityaḥif at death the soul escapes through the eyes, the man reaches the region of AgniNārāyaṇīya, Mahāpuruṣastavatavāgnir āsyam, No. kiñ ca Brahmā ca Rudraś ca Śakraś ca Balabhit prabhuḥSūryas Tārādhipo Vāyur Agnir Varuṇa eva caĀkāśam Jagatī caiva ye ca śeṣā divaukasaḥpralayaṃ na vijānanti ātmanaḥ pari nirmitaṃdigestive Fire, Nīl.food, Nīl.kṣattraṃ, i.e. the kṣattriyasbráhman, i.e. the brahmansbhāvayantibeinganddaughter of king Duryodhana in Māhiṣmatī and the river Narmadāa brahman who, being engaged in study and regarding himself learned with the aid of his learning destroys the reputation of others, falls away from righteousness, and his regions of felicity hereafter lokāḥ are of short duration antavantonivāpaPitāmaha, on the summit of MeruNarake pacyatePage0 b Pitṝṇāṃ, i.e. Śivapl.Page0 b
Agniśiras, a tīrtha .
Agnidhārā, a tīrtha .
Agnijvāla = Śiva .
Agnikanyāpura, a tīrtha .
Agnimat, an Agni .
a part of Khāṇḍavadahanaparvan . Questioned by Janamejaya why Agni desired to consume the forest of Khāṇḍava, Vaiśampāyana related It has been heard in the Purāṇa that King Śvetaki performed sacrifices so incessantly that his ṛtvijes left him, their eyes being afflicted with the continued smoke he then had his sacrifice completed by other ṛtvijes. He then desired to perform another sacrifice, which should extend over years. But he could not obtain any priests to assist him they told him to apply to Rudra. He then went to Kailāsa, and by observing the most rigid austerities he prevailed upon Rudra that his sacrifice should be completed, on the condition that he could for twelve years without intermission pour libations of clarified butter into the fire, himself leading all the while the life of a brahmacārin. When this had been e Rudra said that he would not himself assist at the sacrifice, which properly belonged to the brahmans but he caused Durvāsas to complete it. But Agni became sick, because he had drunk clarified butter for twelve years, and applied to Brahmán. Brahmán told him to consume the forest of Khāṇḍava, that abode of the enemies of the gods, which he had of old once burnt to ashes at the request of the gods, together with its living population then he would regain his own nature. Seven times Agni, assisted by Vāyu, set the forest on fire but the inhabitants extinguished the fire . a, a. Agni again applied to Brahmán, who told him to solicit the old deities Nara and Nārāyaṇa
Agniputra = Skanda, .
Agnī Ṣomau, .
Agnīṣoma .
Agnīṣomīya .
Agnisuta = Skanda, .
Agnisvattāḥ .
Agnitīrtha, a tīrtha on the Sarasvatī. b w, .
Agniveśa, the teacher of Droṇa in arms . Agniveśya.
Agniveśya = Agniveśa .
Āgniveśya .
Agniyonayaḥ .
Agrāhya1, the Great Spirit .
Agrāhya2 = Viṣṇu .
Agraja = Viṣṇu .
Agraṇī = Viṣṇu .
Agratīrtha, a king incarnated from the Krodhavaśa Gaṇa .
Agravara = Śiva .
Āgrayaṇa, an Agni .
Aha = Viṣṇu .
Ahaścara = Śiva .
Ahalyā, the wife of the Ṛṣi Gautama . d, A of spotless form, the wife of a ṛṣi, was outraged by Indra while her husband was alive violated by IndraUtaṅkahas brought to her Madayantīs earrings by Utaṅka
Ahaṃkāra, etc .
Ahaṃyāti, a king, son of Saṃyāti and father of Sārvabhauma .
Ahar . u, .
Ahar3 = Śiva .
Ahar4 = Viṣṇu .
Ahibradhna, v. Ahirbradhna.
Ahicchatrā .
Ahicchatra .
Ahikṣattra .
Āhiṇḍaka .
Ahirbradhna, one of the eleven Rudras .
Ahirbudhnya = Śiva .
Ahorātra = Śiva, .
Ahovīrya .
Āhuka1, a Yādava prince came to YudhiṣṭhiraRājadh.ĀhukākrūrauĀnuśāsanik.rājñaḥMausalap.at the command of A etc the manufacture of wines and spirit was forbidden
Āhuka2, a tribe .
Āhuti .
Āhutimaya = Śiva .
Āhvāyaka, pl one of the five brāhmaṇa cāṇḍālas .
Āhvṛti .
Aiśvara, adj. .
Aikṣvākī, a princess, wife of Suhotra, and mother of Ajamīḍha .
Aikṣvāku1 .
Aikṣvāku2 = Sagara .
Aikṣvāku3 = Triśaṅku .
Aila1 = Purūravas . b, .
Aila2, v. Aina.
Ailavaṃśa .
Ailavila1 = Kubera x, .
Ailavila2 = Dilīpa .
Ailavila3 = an ancient king .
Aina, a people .
Aindhana = the Sun .
Aindra, adj .
Aindradyumna ākhyāna .
Aindradyumni = Janaka, .
Aindrāgna .
Aindrāgneya, .
Aindrāgnya, .
Aindri = Arjuna, .
Airāvaṇa1, the elephant of Indra . Airāvata.
Airāvaṇa2, a snake . Airāvata.
Airāvata1, the elephant of Indra . b, . b, . Airāvaṇa.
Airāvata2, a serpent . b, .
Airāvata3, plur the serpents of Airāvatas kind .
Airāvata4, a varṣa . On the north of Śṛṅgavat and up to the border of the sea is the Varṣa Airāvata, superior to all because of the peak . The sun gives no heat there, and the men are not subject to decay the moon with the stars is the only source of light. The men have the complexion and the fragrance of the lotus, their eyes not wink, without food, with agreeable scent, fallen from Devaloka, without passions, living for, years.
Airāvatapatha, the northern part of the path of the Moon .
Aiṣīka, adj. .
Aiṣīka i.e. Aiṣīkaparvan.
the of the minor parvans of Mhbhr Aiṣīka. The driver of Dhṛṣṭadyumnas chariot, who had managed to escape from Kṛtavarman at a time when he was heedless, informs Yudhiṣṭhira, in the morning, of the extermination of his army. Yudhiṣṭhira falls n on the earth Sātyaki holds him in his embrace Bhīma, etc stretch forth their arms. Having recovered his senses Yudhiṣṭhira laments and despatches Nakula to bring thither Draupadī and the ladies with her then he proceeds to view the slaughter in his camp, and falls n on the earth with all his followers . Draupadī arrives from Upaplavya, falls n in the presence of Yudhiṣṭhira, is comforted by Bhīma, addresses Yudhiṣṭhira, and resolves to sit in Prāya, if the Pāṇḍavas not slay Aśvatthāman. Yudhiṣṭhira urged her to forget her sorrows, as Aśvatthā man is not to be found. Draupadī insists on Aśvatthāmans slaughter and the depredation of the gem on his head, appealing in particular to Bhīmasena . Bhīmasena, making Nakula his charioteer, sets out in pursuit of Aśvatthāman, guided by the track of the latters car wheels . Kṛṣṇa urges Yudhiṣṭhira to make arrangements for the safety of Bhīma, as Aśvatthāman has the Brahma śiras weapon capable of exterminating all foes . The Pāṇḍavas, with Kṛṣṇa, proceed on the track of Bhīma sena Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna, and Yudhiṣṭhira on Kṛṣṇas car with steeds of the Kāmboja breed Śaibya on the right, Sugrīva on the left, Meghapuṣpa and Balāhaka being pārṣṇivāhas, the standard having been made by Viśva karman and standing high like Māyā, with Garuḍa. They in vain ask Bhīma to stop. They find Aśvatthāman sitting with Vyāsa on the bank of Gaṅgā in the midst of many Ṛ. he is attired in a piece of cloth made of Kuśa grass, etc... He consecrates a blade of grass with Mantras, and converts it into that powerful celestial weapon, and throws it off with the words for the destruction of the Pāṇḍavas . Urged by Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna shoots the weapon imparted to him by Droṇa, which was capable of neutralizing all weapons. Extraordinary portents appear in nature. Nārada and Vyāsa, trying to save the three worlds, stand between the two fires . Arjuna withdraws his weapon but Aśvatthāman is incapable of withdrawing his, as no person of uncleansed soul can bring it back, after it has once been let off, but only a brahmacārin otherwise it strikes off his own head. Vyāsa praises Arjuna for not having before used the Brahmaśiras weapon that region where Brahmaśiras is baffled by another high weapon, suffers a drought for twelve years he proposes to him to give the Pāṇḍavas the gem on his head then the Pāṇḍavas would in return grant him his life. Aśvatthāman surrenders his gem, whose wearer ceases to have any fear from weapons, etc and from Dā and N and Rā. the weapon he throws into the wombs of the Pāṇḍava women . Kṛṣṇa says that a brahman at Upaplavya has said to Uttarā, while the Kuru line will become extinct, a son will be born to thee, and he will for that reason be called Parikṣit. Aśvatthāman says that his words could not but be fulfilled. Kṛṣṇa says that the fœtus will die, but be recalled to a long life but Aśvatthāman shall wander for years alone, and without being able to talk to anyone the stench of pus and blood shall emanate from him, and inaccessible forests and dreary moors shall be his abode he shall wander over the earth with the weight of all diseases on him. Parikṣit shall learn the use of all weapons from Kṛpa and rule the earth for sixty years Kṛṣṇa will revive him. Vyāsa approves of Kṛṣṇas curse. Aśvatthāman proceeds to the forest. The Pāṇḍavas with Kṛṣṇa, Vyāsa, and Nārada, taking with them the gem, come to Draupadī, who is sitting in Prāya. Bhīma comforts Draupadī . Draupadī asks Yudhiṣṭhira to place upon his head the gem taken from Aśvatthāman. Yudhiṣṭhira asks Kṛṣṇa about the true cause of Aśvatthāmans success in destroying the Pāṇḍava army . Kṛṣṇa ascribes it to the aid of Mahādeva, and relates that when Brahmán, desirous of creating, saw Rudra, he asked him to create living creatures Rudra promised to so, and plunged into the waters and practised austerities. Then Brahmán called into existence another being in order to make him the creator of living creatures, and he created Dakṣa, etc. but they ran towards their creator from hunger, desirous of devouring him, and he repaired to Brahmán, who assigned herbs, etc as their food, and the weak beings to the strong ones. The creatures multiplied. Then Rudra rose from the water, became angry, and caused his productive limb to disappear in the earth. He had created food for all these creatures. Then he went away, in cheerlessness and rage, to the Muñjavat mountains in order to practise severer austerities . After the Kṛta age the gods prepared a sacrifice, but not knowing Rudra truly they assigned no share to him. Rudra constructed a bow of two of the four kinds of sacrifices, and came as a brahmacārin to the sacrifice the earth shrank with fear, etc. Rudra pierced the sacrifice in the heart it assumed the shape of a deer and fled away with Agni, pursued by Rudra through the skies the gods were stupefied Rudra with his bow broke the arms of Savitṛ and plucked out the eyes of Bhaga and the teeth of Pūṣan the gods uttered a cry the string of his bow burst the gods and the sacrifice gratified Rudra he threw his wrath into the water that wrath, assuming the form of fire, is always employed in consuming the water. He then gave unto Savitṛ his arms, to Bhaga his eyes, and to Pūṣan his teeth, and restored the sacrifice. The gods assigned to him all the libations of clarified butter as his share .
Aja1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Aja2 = the Sun .
Aja3 = Śiva, .
Aja4 = Brahmán, .
Aja5 = Viṣṇu, .
Aja6, son of Jahnu .
Aja7, a king, .
Aja8, adj .
Aja9, plur a kind of Ṛṣis .
Ājagara1 parva = Ājagaraparvan.
Ājagara2 .
Ājagaraparvan . The Pāṇḍavas spent four years with Arjuna in the gardens of Kubera, which added to the preceding six make ten years of exile. In the eleventh year Yudhiṣṭhira, advised by Bhīma, took leave of those regions, determining again to practise austerities on the mountain, when he had regained his king and after Lomaśa had returned to the abode of the gods, they with the brahmans proceeded along that very road, carried by Ghaṭotkaca and his followers, and advised also by Ārṣṭiṣeṇa . Having crossed Kailāsa, they passed one night in the hermitage of king Vṛṣaparvan, then one month at Badarī, seeing Kuberas favourite lake, then crossing the land of Cīna, Tuṣāra, Darada, and all the regions of Kulinda, and the difficult Himālaya regions, they reached the city of the Kirāta king Subāhu, where they met with their charioteers Viśoka, etc and their servants Mahendrasena, etc the cooks and servants of the kitchen. After having stayed there one night, they, dismissing Ghaṭotkaca and his followers, with the charioteers and chariots reached the king of mountains near Yamunā, where they dwelt for one year, occupied with hunting, in the forest Viśākhayūpa. There in a cavern Bhīma was seized by a snake and rescued by Yudhiṣṭhira. In the twelfth year of their exile they repaired thence to the borders of the desert, and desirous of dwelling by the Sarasvatī, they went there, and thence reached the lake of Dvaitavana . At the request of Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana detailed how Bhīma, when they had come from the rājarṣi Vṛṣaparvans hermitage, was hunting with unpoisoned arrows on some spots of Himavat, was seized by a huge snake, and on account of a boon that had been granted to the serpent was quite unable to extricate himself . The serpent said that he was the rājarṣi Nahuṣa, the son of Āyu, whom Agastya had cursed to become a serpent, out of compassion, however, adding to his curse that the person who would be able to answer his questions would deliver him, and that even stronger beings would, when seized by him, lose their strength. He had retained his recollection of his former existence, and nobody who came within his reach at the sixth division of the day could escape him. Bhīma lamented. Now appeared dreadful omens to Yudhiṣṭhira there, and having learnt from Draupadī that Bhīma had long been out, he set out with Dhaumya, having directed Arjuna to protect Draupadī, and Nakula and Sahadeva to protect the brahmans and in the east, following the tracks of Bhīma, he came to the spot . The serpent told Yudhi ṣṭhira who he was, refused other food instead of Bhīma, but promised to deliver him if Yudhiṣṭhira could answer his questions. The first question was about the characteristics of the brahman, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira asked the serpent some questions about the means of salvation, and some other moral and philosophical questions, about the difference between the mind and the intellect, and what had caused Nahuṣas fall. Nahuṣa told that in heaven he used to exact tribute from brah marṣis, gods, Rākṣasas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Pannagas, etc. and that such was the spell of his eyes, that on whatever creature he fixed them he instantly destroyed its power Agastya had foretold that Yudhiṣṭhira would save him from his curse. He delivered Bhīma unhurt, and, assuming his celestial shape, went back to heaven. Yudhi ṣṭhira returned with Dhaumya and Bhīma, and narrated all that to the brahmans, who censured Bhīma, and warned him against attempting such things again .
Ājagava1, the bow of Pṛthu Vainya .
Ājagava2, Arjunas bow .
Ājagava3, Māndhātṛs bow .
Ajaikapād, one of the Rudras, sons of Sthāṇu .
Ajaka, an Asura incarnated as Śālva .
Ajamīḍha, an ancient king .
Ājamīḍha1 = A, .
Ājamīḍha2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Ājamīḍha3 = Nakula, .
Ajamīḍha4 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Ājamīḍha5 = Vidura, .
Ājamīḍha6 = DuryodhanaArjuna, .
Ājamīḍha7 = Saṃvaraṇa, .
Ājamīḍha8, plur .
Ajātaśatru = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Ajeya, an ancient king .
Ajita1, an ancient king b.
Ajita2 = Śiva .
Ajitaśatru .
Ājyapāḥ . b, .
Ākāśa etc.
Ākāśa Gaṅgā . In the neighbourhood of the Mandara mountain, the abode of the gods and ṛṣis coming from Badarī, honoured by Vaihāyasas and Vālakhilyas and Gandharvas and singers of Sāmans there Marīci, Pulaha, Bhṛgu, and Aṅgiras, with the host of M mutter their daily prayers S A the Moon, the Sun, the stars, and planets circumambulate it Śiva carries its water on his head at Gangādvāra. According to the counsel of Lomaśa the Pāṇḍavas aed it, and then continued their journey with the hosts of ṛṣis . b, Svargārohanap.
Akāśani = Śiva .
Akala = Śiva .
Akāla = Śiva .
Akampana, a king In days of old there was a king named Akampana. Once, on the field of battle, he was surrounded by his foes. His son Hari was at last slain in the midst of the army. A. grieved day and night. Then the . ṛ. Nārada came and told him the origin of death . Therefore, said Nārada, t indulge in fruitless grief for creatures after they are dead... Akampana felt consoled, and Nārada went to the woods of Nandana.
Akara = Śiva .
Akāra, .
Akarkara, a serpent .
Ākarṣa .
Akartṛ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ākhaṇḍala = Indra .
Akrośa .
Akrodhadrohamoha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Akrodhana .
Akrūra1 .
Akrūra2 = Viṣṇu .
Akrūrakarman = Śiva, .
Ākṛṣṭa, plur a sort of Ṛṣis .
Akṛtavraṇa, a follower of Paraśu Rāma . b, A. had followed Rāma Jāma dagnya and been an eye witness of all his deeds in former days .
Ākṛti .
Akṣa .
Akṣa = Śiva .
Akṣahṛdayaprāpti .
Akṣamālā .
Akṣamālin = Śiva .
Akṣara, .
akṣauhiṇī, an army of a certain kind and magnitude etc etc.
Akṣīṇa, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Akṣobhya = Viṣṇu .
Akūpāra .
Alakā, the city and tank of Kubera .
Alakādhipa = Kubera, .
Alakanandā .
Alamba . b, with divine trees, with golden boughs, and others with fruits of gold and silver and branches of precious gems.
Ālamba .
Alambāyana .
Alambuṣa, a rākṣasa, variously genealogized and pre sumably ultimately identical with other similar figures . the rākṣasa, Ārśyaśṛṇga, who kills Irāvat, is Alambuṣa .
Alambuṣā, an Apsaras .
Alarka1, a rājarṣi . b, e, . The Pitṛs said R. ṛ. Alarka, having with his bow conquered the whole earth, set his mind on what is subtle he said My mind has become strong having conquered the mind, ones conquest becomes permanent shall shoot sharp pointed arrows at the mind. The mind said These arrows will never pierce me, but only slay thyself thou look out for other arrows with which to destroy me and so also with the nose, the tongue, etc. Then he set himself to penances, but failed to obtain fit arrows. He engaged in yoga, and now slew all the senses with one arrow. He complained that he in courting sovereignty till now there is no happiness higher than yoga.
Alarka2, a worm .
Alātākṣī, a mātṛ. u, .
Alāyudha, a Rākṣasa .
Alinda, pl a people in Bharata varṣa .
Alola = Śiva .
Alolupa, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . = the Sun, .
Alulupa, v. Alolupa.
Amadhya, .
Amāhaṭha, a serpent .
Amānin = Viṣṇu .
Amara1, pl the gods, etc. sing etc.
Amara2 = Śiva .
Amaraśreṣṭha = Indra.
Amarādhipa = Indra.
Amaradviṣaḥ, the Asuras, .
Amaradyuti = Śiva, .
Amaraṇa = Śiva .
Amaraprabhu = Viṣṇu .
Amararāja = Indra.
Amarāvatī, the city of Indra Amarāvatī was the resort of Siddhas and Cāraṇas, and the Nandana garden of the troops of the Apsarases. The region cannot be seen by those who have not gone through ascetic austerities, etc .
Amareśvara = Indra.
Amatsyāśin, son of Viśvāmitra .
Amāvasī, the day of the new moon .
Amāvasu, son of Purūravas and Urvaśī .
Ambā, the eldest daughter of the king of Kāśi, chosen by the Saubha king, carried off by Bhīṣma to be married to Vicitravīrya, but released refused by the Saubha king, etc reborn as Śikhaṇḍin .
Ambājanman, a tīrtha .
Ambālikā, . Śāntanr Kauśalya Kāśirāja Vicitravīrya Ambikā. AmbālikāVyāsa . Ambā. Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Pāṇḍu . Kausalyā.
Ambarāvṛta = Śiva .
Ambarīṣa1, an ancient king bis b, . A. N. fought alone against, kings, who were reduced to subjection, and he, conquering the whole earth, performed sacrifices, etc. in those sacrifices he as sacrificial presents gave the kings of hundreds and thousands of kings to his, of priests, and numbers of princes and kings with their treasuries, etc . b, . b, .
Ambarīṣa2, a Nāga .
Ambaṣṭha1, pl a people .
Ambaṣṭha2, the Ambaṣṭha king .
Ambaṣṭhaka, a king .
Ambaṣṭhapati .
Ambhonidhi1 = Kṛṣṇa.
Ambhonidhi2 = Viṣṇu .
Ambhoruha, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Ambikā, sister of Ambālikā . Kausalyā.
Ambikā, an Apsaras .
Ambikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Ambikābhartṛ = Śiva.
Ambikāsuta = Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
Āmbikeya = Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
Ambopākhyāna i.e. Ambopākhyānaparvan.
. . Questioned by Duryodhana why he would not slay Śikhaṇḍin, Bhīṣma said After Śāntanus death and Citrāṅgadas demise, obedient to the counsels of Satyavatī installed, according to the ordinance, Vicitravīrya as king. repaired on a single car to the svayaṃvara of the daughters of the king of Kāśi Ambā, Ambikā, and Ambālikā, who were vīryaśalkāḥ. Challenging all the kings, took the three maidens upon my car, and repeatedly told my name to the kings, and vanquished them all. Then came back to Hāstinapura and made over those maidens, intending them for Vicitravīrya, to Satyavatī . Satyavatī became very glad. When the nuptials approached, Ambā said that she had before mentally chosen the Śālva king as her lord, and that he, without her fathers knowledge, had privately proposed to her . then laid the matter before Satyavatī and our counsellors, ṛtvijes, and purohitas, and permitted Ambā to depart. She came to the city of the Śālva king, escorted by a number of old brahmans, accompanied by her nurse. But he would no longer have her as his wife, because she was to be wedded to another. It was of no avail that she declared she had been carried away by force, weeping and against her will for Śālva was in terror of Bhīṣma. She cursed Bhīṣma, her father, herself, Śālva, and Dhātṛ . She resolved that her vengeance should fall upon Bhīṣma. She repaired to a hermitage of ascetics, and stayed there that night. There was the great brahman Śaikhāvatya, a preceptor in the scriptures and the Āraṇyakas . The ascetics counselled her to repair to her fathers abode but she would not, lest she should be slighted by her relatives she wished to practise ascetic austerities. Then came her maternal grandfather, the Sṛñjaya king, the R. ṛ. Hotravāhana, and advised her to go to Rāma Jāmadagnya, who would slay Bhīṣma in battle if Bhīṣma did not obey his behest he always dwelt on the Mahendra mountain with Ṛ G and Aps. While they were speaking there appeared Akṛtavraṇa, a dear companion of Rāma he said that Rāma would come the next morning to see Hotravāhana Hotravāhana related the history of Ambā to Akṛtavraṇa . The next day Rāma appeared with his disciples, his bow in hand, etc. . Ambā asked him to slay Bhīṣma . Rāma said he would not take up arms except at the command of brahmans. Akṛtavraṇa supported the demand of Ambā. The next morning they all set out for Kurukṣetra with the maiden, and quartered themselves on the banks of Sarasvatī. On the third day Rāma sent a message to Bhīṣma, who came and worshipped him. Rāma demanded that he should bestow Ambā upon Vicitravīrya, which Bhīṣma refused. Rāma threatened to slay him in battle Bhīṣma said that Rāma had himself taught him the four kinds of arms and quoted a śloka in the Purāṇa, sung by Marutta . Having first gone to Hāstinapura and represented everything to Satyavatī, Bhīṣma set out for Kurukṣetra on his car . Gaṅgā in vain endeavoured to make them desist . Bhīṣma asked Rāma to mount on a chariot but Rāma said that the earth was his chariot, the Vedas his steeds, the wind his charioteer, and the mothers of the Vedas his harness. Bhīṣma saw him stationed on an excellent car, with Akṛtavraṇa as his charioteer. Bhīṣma propitiated Rāma by worshipping him, on foot. The combat lasted for many days at last Bhīṣma, from pity and reverence, would not strike Rāma any longer, and the combat ceased at sunset . Next morning the battle was taken up again. Bhīṣmas Vāyavya weapon was neutralized by Rāmas Guhyaka Bhīṣmas Āgneya by Rāmas Vāruṇa. At a momentary swoon of Bhīṣma, Akṛtavraṇa, Ambā, etc were filled with joy then Rāma fell into a swoon and dropped n the ascetics and Ambā comforted him. A conflagration was caused in the welkin. At evening Rāma withdrew . The next day they fought again, and at evening they desisted . The next day Bhīṣmas charioteer was slain Bhīṣma, pierced by an arrow, fell n to the earth eight brahmans supported him on their arms in mid air Gaṅgā was seen on his car she had controlled his steeds in the combat. Bhīṣma dismissed her and fought till evening. When Rāma for a moment lost his consciousness, Rāhu enveloped the sun, etc. At evening the battle ceased next day it was taken up again, and lasted for twenty three days . During the night the above mentioned eight brahmans appeared to Bhīṣma in a dream, comforted him, and said that the weapon Prasvāpa would come to his knowledge, for it had been known to him in his former life neither Rāma nor any person on earth was acquainted with it Rāma would not be slain by it, but he would fall asleep then thou wilt awaken him with the weapon Sambodhana . Next day Akṛtavraṇa must comfort Rāma. Bhīṣma and Rāma both used the Brāhma weapon the welkin seemed to be ablaze, and As Ṛ G and Rā. were greatly afflicted, etc. Then the mantras for using the Prasvāpa weapon suddenly came to Bhīṣmas mind . Voices in the sky and Nārada forbade him to let off the Prasvāpa weapon against Rāma, and the above mentioned brahmans supported the words of Nārada. Beholding the Prasvāpa weapon withdrawn, Rāma declared himself to be vanquished. Rāma then beheld before him his father and fathers father, who forbade him any more to fight with kṣattriyas, especially with Bhīṣma, whom the gods forbade to fight with Rāma. Arjuna has been ordained by Svayambhū to be the slayer of Bhīṣma. The ascetics with Ṛcīka, Nārada, Gaṅgā, and the Pitṛs succeeded in bringing about peace the above mentioned eight brahmans ordered. Bhīṣma to go to Rāma, who, summoning Ambā, said that he could no more for her. Ambā went away, resolved to devote herself to austerities, that she might herself slay Bhīṣma. Rāma with the ascetics departed for the Mahendra mountain Bhīṣma entered Hāstinapura, and was blessed by Satyavatī, and he appointed spies to ascertain the ngs of Ambā. Bhīṣma became afflicted when he heard that she was resolved on ascetic austerities, but was consoled by Nārada and Vyāsa. After having lived for six months on air she stood a year in the waters of Yamunā, etc and thus went on for twelve years. She then went into Vatsabhūmi, etc. . Gaṅgā, angry because she observed these vows for the destruction of Bhīṣma, cursed her, saying that after death she would become a river crooked in her course, etc. When Ambā once more came back to Vatsabhūmi she there became the above mentioned river, but in con sequence of her ascetic merit, only with half her body, while as to the other half she remained a maiden as before . To the ascetics in Vatsabhūmi she said that she was resolved to obtain manhood in order to be revenged on Bhīṣma. Śiva appeared in his own form in the midst of those great ṛṣis, and promised her that she would slay Bhīṣma and even obtain manhood, and in a new body remember all the incidents born in the race of Drupada, she would become a mahāratha. Then Śiva disappeared. Ambā burnt herself on the bank of the Yamunā in the very sight of those great Ṛṣis . Questioned by Duryodhana how Śikhaṇḍin, having before been born a girl, afterwards became a man, Bhīṣma related The eldest queen of king Drupada was childless. During those years Drupada worshipped Śaṅkara for the sake of offspring, resolving to bring about Bhīṣmas destruction, and practising the austerest of penances. He begged Śiva for a son Śiva said he should have a child who would be both female and male. In due time the queen conceived, and gave birth to a daughter, whom Drupada gave out for a son, and called her Śikhaṇḍin. Bhīṣma alone, from his spies and from Nārada, knew the truth . In arrows and weapons she became a disciple of Droṇa. They afterwards wedded her to the daughter of the Daśārṇa king Hiraṇyavarman, quite assured that the words of Śiva would become true. Śikhaṇḍin, after marriage, came back to Kāmpilya. At the discovery of Śikhaṇḍins sex a war was about to break out with Hiraṇyavarman . Drupada was not naturally courageous, and became filled with fear, and, in the presence of others, asked his queen about the truth . The queen said that, childless as she was, when her daughter Śikhaṇḍinī was born she had, from fear of her co wives, told Drupada that it was a son, remembering the words of Śiva. Drupada prepared for war, and, with the queen, prayed to the gods. Śikhaṇḍinī went to a forest, the haunt of the powerful Yakṣa Sthūṇākarṇa, who was a follower of Kubera, resolved on putting an end to her own life. Repeatedly requested by Sthūṇākarṇa to ask a boon, she told him the matter, and wished to become a man, as long as Hiraṇyavarman had not left the city . He gave her his manhood and took her womanhood for a certain period, i.e. till Hiraṇyavarman should have departed. Śikhaṇḍin went home and informed Drupada, who with his wife recollected the words of Śiva. Hiraṇyavarman sent a brahman as an envoy to Kāmpilya, threatening to ex terminate Drupada with his counsellors, sons, etc. Drupada sent a brahman as his envoy to Hiraṇyavarman, maintaining that Śikhaṇḍin was a male let it be made clear by means of witnesses somebody has spoken falsely to thee. Hiraṇya varman despatched a number of young ladies for ascertaining it, and they attested that he was a male. Hiraṇyavarman then passed some days with Drupada in gladness, gave much wealth to Śikhaṇḍin, and then departed, having rebuked his daughter. Kubera, hearing the matter from the Yakṣas, cursed Sthūṇākarṇa, saying that his femininity should remain as it was as the Yakṣas began to soften him, he set a limit to the curse, i.e. Śikhaṇḍins death. When Śikhaṇḍin came to redeem his pledge, Sthūṇākarṇa related his curse and let him go. Drupada gave Śikhaṇḍin as a pupil to Droṇa, who taught him the fourfold Dhanurveda, along with the Dhārtarāṣṭras and Dhṛṣṭadyumna. It was Ambā who had been born as Śikhaṇḍin. Bhīṣma had made a vow not to shoot weapons against a woman, or one that had before been a woman, or one bearing a feminine name, or one whose form resembled that of a woman . Duryodhana asked in what time Bhīma, etc could annihilate the hostile army. Bhīṣma said he could it in a month Droṇa said the same Kṛpa men tioned two months Aśvatthāman, ten nights Karṇa, five nights. Bhīṣma ridiculed Karṇa, saying that he will think otherwise when he had encountered Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa . Having learnt this from his spies, Yudhiṣṭhira asked Arjuna the same question. Arjuna said that with Kṛṣṇa as his ally he could exterminate the three worlds with the gods, etc in the twinkling of an eye the weapon given him by Paśupati as a hunter, which Paśupati used at the end of the yuga for destroying created things, was not known to Bhīṣma, etc. he enumerated Yudhiṣṭhiras allies Yudhiṣṭhira was himself competent to exterminate the three worlds . Next morning, under a cloudless sky, the Kaurava army marched to the field, first Vinda, etc. Aśvatthāman, etc in the second division in the rear, Kṛtavarman, etc with the Dhārtarāṣṭras at their head. Duryodhanas encampment looked like a second Hāstinapura . In the same way Yudhiṣṭhira also ordered out his troops, headed by Dhṛṣṭadyumna, under Dhṛṣṭaketu, etc first Abhimanyu, etc. then Bhīma and Arjuna in the second division last of all himself with Virāṭa and Drupada, etc. Then he disposed his divisions in a different order, confounding the Dhārtarā ṣṭras the Draupadeyas, etc under Bhīmasena in the middle division, Virāṭa, etc. in that part where Yudhi ṣṭhira himself was, Cekitāna, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira was followed by Saucitti, etc .
Ambuśāyin = Śiva .
Ambujāla = Śiva .
Ambumatī, a river .
Ambupa = Varuṇa.
Ambuvāhinī .
Ambuvīca Karṇa spoke con temptuously of Bhīṣma and Droṇa, saying that everyones happiness depended on destiny and not on his friends, etc mentioning the Magadha king Ambuvīca at Rājagṛha, whose affairs were in the hands of his minister Mahākarṇi, himself never attending to them his minister appropriated everything belonging to the king, but he did not succeed in acquiring the king.
Aṃśa, one of the Ādityas . u, a, . Sūrya.
Aṃśāvatāraṇa .
comprehends the three first chapters of Sambhavaparvan, i.e . Conformably to the consultation held between Indra and Nārāyaṇa, the celestials were born in the lines of brahmarṣis and rājarṣis, and they slew the Dānavas, Rā G and Snakes, etc. Janamejaya desired to hear, from the beginning, of the births of Dā G Aps men, Y and Rā. The six spiritual sons of Brahmán Kāśyapa. The thirteen daughters of Dakṣa . The Ādityāḥ . Ditis son Hiraṇyakaśipu and his five sons. Prahlādas three sons. Virocana Bali Bāṇa . Forty sons of Danu . Ten more races of Danu putrāḥ. Siṃhikās four sons . Offspring of Krūrā . The four sons of Danāyus. The offspring of Kālā . The upādhyāya of the Asuras was Śukra or Uśanas, son of a ṛṣi he had four sons who sacrificed for the Asuras they were Brahmaloka parāyaṇāḥ. This progeny of the Asuras and gods is related in the Purāṇa. The six Vainateyāḥ. The six Kādraveyāḥ. The sixteen Deva gandharvā Mauneyāḥ. The eight daughters of Prādhā and the ten Devagandharvāḥ Prādheyāḥ. Enumera tion of thirteen Apsarases, daughters of Prādhā and the Devarṣi . The four Gandharva sattamāḥ, apparently sons of Prādhā. Amṛtaṃ, brāhmaṇā gāvo Gandharvāpsarasas tathā apatyaṃ Kapi lāyās tu Purāṇe parikīrtitaṃ. Thus have told you about the birth of all creatures of Gandharvas, Apsarases, Snakes, Suparṇas, R and M etc. . Brahmaṇo mānasāḥ putrā viditāḥ ṣaṇ ṃaharṣayaḥ. The Rudras, sons of Sthāṇu. Enumeration of the six maharṣis . The three sons of Aṅgiras. Atris many sons were perfect maharṣis. Pulastyas offspring were Rā the monkeys, K and Y. Pulahas offspring were the Śalabhas, the lions, Kp the tigers, Y and wolves. Kratus sons were the companions of the Sun . The ṛṣi Prajāpati Dakṣa sprang from the right toe of Brahmán, and Dakṣas wife from the left toe of Brahmán he had lost his sons, but had fifty daughters, whom he made his putrikāḥ he bestowed ten of them on Dharma, twenty seven on Indu, thirteen on Kaśyapa. Enumeration of the ten wives of Dharma . The twenty seven wives of Soma are all junction stars of the nakṣatras . The Vasus with their mothers and sons and grandsons, etc. especially Kumāra, Prabhāsa, Viśvakarman . Dharma, assuming a human body, came out through the right breast of Brahmán. His three sons and their wives. From Marīcis son Kaśyapa sprang the gods and Asuras, lokānāṃ prabhavas tu saḥ. Tvāṣṭrī, the wife of Savitṛ, in the form of a mare, gave birth to the Aśvins in the skies. The sons of Aditi are twelve the youngest of them is Viṣṇu, upon whom the worlds are dependent. bis trayaśtriṃśata ity ete devās i.e. eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Ādityas, Prajāpati, and Vaṣaṭkāra teṣām ahaṃ tavaanvayaṃ sam pravakṣyāmi pakṣaiś ca kulato gaṇānRudrāṇām aparaḥ pakṣaḥ Sādhyānāṃ Marutāṃ tathāVasūnāṃ Bhārgavaṃ vidyād Viśvedevāṃs tathaiva caVainateyas tu Garuḍo balavān Aruṇas tathāBṛhaspatiś ca bhagavān Ādityeṣv eva gaṇyate Aśvinau Guhyakān viddhi sarvauṣadhyas tathā paśūnete devagaṇā, rājan, kīrtitās te nupūrvaśaḥyān kīrtayitvā manujaḥ sarvapāpaiḥ pramucyate. Bhṛgu came out ripping open the heart of Brahmán. Bhṛgus son was Kavi, and Kavis son was the planet Śukra, who was appointed by Svayambhū to give and withhold rain, and to inflict and remit calamities, and who by the power of asceticism became the guru both of the Daityas and of the gods. As he was thus employed by Vidhi in seeking welfare, Bhṛgu begat Cyavana, who, falling out of his mothers womb through anger, released her . Cyavanas wife was Āruṣī, daughter of Manu their son Aurva came out ripping open the thigh of Āruṣī. Bhṛgu Manu Cyavana Āruṣī Aurva Ṛcīka Jamadagni others A. B. C. Rāma Offspring by thousands . Brahmán Dhātṛ and Vidhātṛ, who stayed with Manu. Lakṣmī Śukras daughter Devī was the eldest wife of Varuṇa her children are Bala and Surā . Adharma was born when creatures began to devour each other from want of food. His wife is Nirṛti, whence the Rākṣasas, who are called Nairṛtāḥ, and Bhaya, Mahā bhaya, and Mṛtyu. Mrtyu has neither wife nor children. Tāmrā Kākī Śyenī Bhāsī Dhṛtarāṣṭrī Śukī The owls The hawks. The bhāsas and vultures. Ducks and swans, and cakravākas. The parrots. Krodha had nine daughters of wrathful disposition, Mṛgī, Mṛgamandā, Harī, Bhadramanas, Mātaṅgī, Śārdūlī, Śvetā, Surabhi, who has four daughters Rohiṇī from whom the cows sprang Gandharvī, the horses Vimalā Analā, whose offspring are the seven sorts of trees that have pulpy fruits the date, palm, hintala, tali, the little date, the nut, and the cocoanut, according to PCR. and a daughter, Śukī, Surasā . Aruṇas wife, Śyenī, gave birth to Sampāti and Jaṭāyus. Surasā gave birth to the Nāgas, Kadrū to the Pannagas, Vinatā to Garuḍa and Aruṇa . Complying with the wish of Janamejaya, Vaiśam pāyana mentions the gods, Dānavas, etc who were born among men, and in whom they became incarnated. Bhīṣma. Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Vi dura. Enumeration, among others of the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, including Yuyutsu, incarnations of Pulastyas sons, except Duryodhana, who was a portion of Kali, and a daughter, Duḥśalā. Nakula and Sahadeva were the handsomest of all creatures. Soma set a condition for letting his son Varcas be incarnate in Abhimanyu. Draupadīs five sons were the Viśvas . . Incarnations of Nārāyaṇa, Śeṣa, Sanatkumāra, portions of the Apsarases, Śrī, Śacī, Siddhi and Dhṛti, Mati, . ādir aṃśāvatāraṇa = aṃśāvatāranaparvan, .
Aṃśu = Śiva .
Aṃśumat1, a king .
Aṃśumat2, the sons son of king Sagara .
Aṃśumat3, a Bhoja king .
Aṃśumat4, one of the Viśvedevas .
Aṃśumat5 = Sūrya.
Aṃśumat6 = Soma.
Ameyātman1 = Śiva.
Ameyātman2 = Viṣṇu .
Amita = Śiva .
Amitāśana = Viṣṇu .
Amitāśanā, a Mātṛ. u, .
Amitadhvaja, an ancient king .
Amitaujas, a king a, .
Amitavikrama = Viṣṇu .
Amitrajit = Śiva .
Amogha1, a Fire .
Amogha2, a Yakṣa .
Amogha3 = Skanda .
Amogha4 = Śiva, .
Amogha5 = Viṣṇu .
Amoghā, a Mātṛ. u, .
Amoghārtha = Śiva .
amṛta1, ambrosia . u, .
Amṛta2 = Śiva .
Amṛta3 = Viṣṇu .
Amṛta4, .
Amṛtā, a Māgadha princess, wife of Anaśvan .
Amṛtāśa = Viṣṇu .
Amṛtākṣa, .
. Āstīkaparvan. Once the gods having assembled on the summit of Mount Meru, Nārāyaṇa told Brahmán to churn the Ocean with the gods and the Asuras, in order to obtain Amṛta . Viṣṇu and Brahmán prevailed upon Ananta, the prince of Snakes, to bring up the mountain Mandara. The gods having obtained from the Ocean the permission to churn it, Indra placed Mandara on the back of the Tortoise king Mandara was made the churning staff and Vāsuki the cord, the Asuras holding him by the hood and the gods by the tail, while Ananta, who sided with Nārāyaṇa, at intervals raised the snakes hood and suddenly lowered it. Black vapours with flames issued from Vāsukis mouth, etc. After some churning the gums of various trees and herbs mingled with the waters of the Ocean, and the milky water produced clarified butter, but even then the Amṛta did not appear. The gods were tired and repaired to Brahmán, who prevailed upon Nārāyaṇa to grant the gods new strength to churn afresh. After a while the Moon, Śrī, Surādevī, Ucchaiḥ śravas, and Kaustubha came forth on the side of the gods then Dhanvantari with a white vessel of Amṛta in his hand then Airāvaṇa, and at last the poison Kālakūṭa, that Śiva, solicited by Brahmán, swallowed for the safety of the creation from that time Śiva is called Nīlakaṇṭha . The Asuras preparing to rob the gods of Śrī and the Amṛta, Nārāyaṇa, assisted by his māyā, assumed a ravishing female form the Dānavas and Daityas were infatuated, and placed the Amṛta in her hands . While the Daityas and Dānavas pursued the gods, Viṣṇu with Nara let the gods drink of the Amṛta the Dānava Rāhu also drank of it in the disguise of a god, but was discovered by Sūrya and Soma then Nārāyaṇa instantly seized his discus and cut off his head, which to this day swallows Sūrya and Soma. In a dreadful battle on the shores of the salt water sea the gods, headed by Nārāyaṇa with his discus Sudarśana and Nara with his celestial bow, discomfited the Asuras, who entered the bowels of the earth or plunged into the sea of salt waters. The gods replaced Mandara on its own base, and, headed by Indra, they entrusted the keeping of the vessel of Amṛta to Kirīṭin, .
Amṛtāṃśūdbhava = Viṣṇu .
Amṛtapa1, a Dānava .
Amṛtapa2 = Viṣṇu .
Amṛtapā = Śiva .
Amṛtavapus = Viṣṇu .
Amṛteśaya, .
Amṛtyu = Viṣṇu .
Amukha = Śiva .
Amukhya = Śiva .
Amūrtarayas, an ancient king .
Amūrtarayasa1, an ancient king .
Āmūrtarayasa2 = Gaya.
Amūrti = Viṣṇu .
Amūrtimat = Viṣṇu .
Anabhijñeya = Kṛṣṇa.
Anaśvan .
Anādhṛṣṭi1 .
Anādhṛṣṭi2 .
Anādhṛṣṭi3, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Anādhṛṣṭisuta .
Anādhṛṣya, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Anādi1 = Kṛṣṇa.
Anādi2 = Viṣṇu .
Anādi3, .
Anādi madhya nidhana = Viṣṇu.
Anādi madhya paryanta = Kṛṣṇa.
Anādi nidhana = Brahmán, Kṛṣṇa, Puruṣottama, Viṣṇu.
Anādya = Kṛṣṇa.
Anagha1 .
Anagha2, a Deva Gandharva .
Anagha3 = Śiva .
Anagha4 = Viṣṇu .
Anagha5 = Skanda.
Anagha6, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Ānakadundubhi = Vasudeva.
Anala1, one of the eight Vasus, son of Prajāpati or Dharma and Śāṇḍilī, and father of Skanda. See Agni, Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa, Śiva.
Anala2, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Analā .
Analaputra = Skanda.
Analasūnu = Skanda.
Analātmaja = Skanda.
Anāmaya = Viṣṇu, Skanda.
Ānanda1, one of the warriors of Skanda. u, .
Ānanda2 = Viṣṇu .
Anaṅga1, son of Kardama .
Anaṅga2 = Kāma, Śiva.
Anaṅgāṅgahara = Śiva.
Ananta1, the prince of Snakes . Śeṣa.
Ananta2, a warrior of Skandas. u, .
Ananta3ff. = Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu, Śiva, Mahāpuruṣa, Nārāyaṇa, the Sun .
Anantā, a Mādhava princess, wife of Pūrus son Janamejaya .
Anantabhoga . See also Mahāpuruṣa.
Anantaśrī = Viṣṇu .
Anantagati = Mahāpuruṣa.
Anantākhya = mahāpuruṣa.
Anantaparimeya = Kṛṣṇa.
Anantarūpa = Śiva, Viṣṇu, Skanda.
Anantātman = Viṣṇu .
Anantavijaya, the conch of Yudhiṣṭhira . Vi, .
Anaraṇya .
Anartha = Viṣṇu .
Ānartta1, pl a people .
Ānartta2, sg chief of the Ānarttas .
Anaupama = Śiva .
Anauṣadha = Śiva .
Anavadyā, an Apsaras .
Anāyuṣ, erratum for Danāyus.
Aṇḍa = Śiva, the Sun.
Aṇḍadhara = Śiva .
Aṇḍaja . b, aṇḍaje janmani
Aṇḍajāḥ = Śiva .
Aṇḍanāśana = Śiva .
Andha, pl a people, presumably for Andhaka .
Andhaka1, pl a people .
Andhaka2, an Asura killed by Rudra .
Andhaka Bhoja .
Andhaka ghātin = Śiva .
Andhakāraka, a mountain in Krauñcadvīpa .
Āndhra, pl a people . Andhrakāḥ.
Andhraka .
Andhrakāḥ, a people . Andhra.
Anekamūrti = Viṣṇu .
Anenas, son of Āyus and Svarbhānavī .
Aṅga1, pl a people descended from Aṅga . c, .
Aṅga2 .
Aṅga3 Dīrghatamas Sudeṣṇā Aṅga, Vaṅga, Kaliṅga, Puṇḍra, Suhma .
Aṅga4 cf etc. . b, .
Aṅga5. b, .
Aṅga6. c, .
Aṅga7, the Aṅga king at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira . Aṅgaputra.
Aṅga8, the Aṅga country or adj .
Aṅga9, one or the other of the Aṅga kings of the past .
Aṅga1, neut. pl. = Vedāṅgāni, .
Aṅgada1, a monkey chief, son of Vālin .
Aṅgada2, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Cārucitrāṅgada.
Aṅgaka, pl a people presumably = Aṅga .
Aṅgalubdha = Śiva .
Aṅgaputra = Aṅga7 .
Aṅgāra .
Aṅgāraka1, the planet Mars . Bhauma.
Aṅgāraka2 = the Sun .
Aṅgāraka3, a Sauvīra prince .
Aṅgāraparṇa, a Gandharva king = Citraratha .
Āṅgariṣṭha, an ancient king .
Aṅgāvaha .
i.e .
Āṅgeyī = Sudevā, .
Aṅghrika, son of Viśvāmitra .
Āṅgī, an ancient queen, wife of Ariha and mother of Mahābhauma .
Aṅgiraḥsuta = Bṛhaspati. b, .
Āṅgiraja, .
Aṅgiras1, one of the maharṣis, Brahmáns spiritual sons .
Aṅgiras2, pl the descendants of Aṅgiras . u, .
Aṅgiras3 = Bṛhaspati . b, Aṅgiras Bṛhaspati curses the Ocean that it should be tainted with fishes, etc.Ānuśāsanik.Indra gave him the whole earth
Aṅgiras4 = Sārasvata .
Aṅgiras5 = Utathya .
Aṅgiras6 = Viṣṇu .
Āṅgirasa1 = Bṛhaspati . b, .
Āṅgirasa2 = Utathya. j, .
Āṅgirasa3 = Saṃvartta. b, .
Āṅgirasa4 = Kaca .
Āṅgirasa5 = Sudhanvan .
Āṅgirasa6 = Cyavana .
Aṅgirasa7 = Bala .
Āṅgirasa8 = the planet Jupiter .
Āṅgirasa9, pl the descendants of Aṅgiras . Atharvan.
Āṅgirasa1 . c, . b, . j, .
Āṅgirasa1 .
Āṅgirasa . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Mārkaṇḍeya related the following old story Aṅgiras in days of yore practised austerities in his hermitage, so that he excelled Agni, who, thinking that Brahmán had created a new Fire, was greatly depressed, but Aṅgiras, saying that Agni had been created by Brahmán to officiate as fire, asked him to occupy his proper place, and when Agni only wished to be the second or Prājā patyaka fire, at last prevailed upon him to remain and make him his first son. Aṅgiras also had a son, Bṛhaspati knowing him the Āṅgirasa to be the firstborn son of Fire, the gods came and learned the matter from Aṅgiras . The children of Aṅgiras and Śubhā the son Bṛhaspati, and the eight daughters, Bhānumatī, Rāgā, Sinībālī, also called Kapardisutā, because she was both visible and invisible, Arciṣmatī, Haviṣmatī, Mahiṣmatī, Mahāmatī, and Kuhū . Bṛhaspati Cāndramasī . Śaṃyu Satyā Dharmajā. Bharadvāja Vīrā. Bharata daughters. Vīra Śarayū. Bharata. Bharatī. Siddhi. Niścyavana. Vipāpa . Niṣkṛti. Svana. Viśvajit. Viśvabhuj Gomatī. Vaḍavāgni. Ūrdhvabhāj. Sviṣṭakṛt. Manyu. Manyantī. Svāhā. Kāma. Amogha. Uktha. Mahavāc = Samāśvāsa. With Kāśyapa, Vāsiṣṭha, Prāṇa, son of Prāṇa, Agni Āṅgirasa, and Cyavana Trisvarcaka, he, after a penance lasting for many years, obtained the son Pañcajanya . Pāñcajanya, after, years of penances, produced the fire of the Pitṛs from his head he created Bṛhat and Rathantara, from his mouth Vāta and Rasāhara, in his navel Śiva, from his might Indra, from his soul Vāyu and Agni, from his arms Anudāttau, and Viśve and the elements, and then the five sons of the Pitṛs. Bṛhadrathas son was Praṇidhi, Kāśyapas Mahattara, Āṅgiras Bhānu, Varcas Saubhara, and Prāṇas Anudātta, in all twenty five. He also produced three times five devāḥ Yajña muṣaḥ, Subhīma, Atibhīma, Bhīma, Bhīmabala, Abala, Sumitra, Mitravaṭ, Mitrajña, Mitravardhana, Mitradharman, Surapravīra, Vīra, Suveśa, Suravarcas, and Surāṇām api hantṛ. Bṛhaduktha and Rathantara or Mitravinda, sons of Tapas . Many fires enumerated, among others the five Ūrjaskarāḥ, sons of Tapas the six sons of Bhānu with his wives Suprajā and Bṛhadbhāsā Sūryajā . Niśā was likewise the wife of Bhānu, and gave birth to one daughter, to Agni and Soma, and to five Fires . The Fire who in company with Parjanya is honoured with the first havis at the Cāturmāsyas is Agni Vaiśvānara. He who is called the lord of all the world is Viśvapati, the second son of Manu, etc. . Genealogy of the Fires continued. The Fire Saha, from fear of his grandson the Fire Bharata, who burns the dead bodies, hid himself in the sea, asking Atharvan to carry the oblations to the gods. When his place of concealment had been divulged by the fishes, Saha cursed them, saying that they should become the food of all creatures in various ways. Then Saha gave up his body and entered the earth, where he created various metals from his pus force and scent, from his bones the devadāru, from his phlegm glass, from his bile mārakata, from his liver the black iron, the clouds from his nails, the corals from his veins, etc and remained absorbed in meditation, whence he was roused by the tapas of Bhṛgu, Āṅgiras, etc. Seeing the ṛṣhi, he again took refuge in the water. The whole world with the gods sought the protection of Atharvan, who searched the sea, and finding the Fire, created the worlds . So Agni was formerly destroyed by Atharvan, and called back he carries the oblations, and travelling about various countries and living there, he produced the various fires mentioned in the Vedas. Enumeration of rivers that are said to be the mothers of the fires. The wife of Adbhuta was Priyā, and his son Vibhūrasi . There are as many somas as the number of fires mentioned. Also in the race of Atri mind born sons of Brahmán sprang forth. Atri, wishing to procreate sons, conceived these in his mind, and the fires came out of his, the brahmans, body. The powers of these fires are the same as those of the Adbhuta fire as related in the Vedas, for they are all one and the same, the first Aṅgiras, sprung from body in various forms like the jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice .
Āṅgirasa1 .
Aṅgirasaka, adj .
Āṅgirasī .
Āṅgirasī .
Āṅgirasopākhyāna, v. Āṅgirasa1.
Anīśa = Viṣṇu .
Anīkajit = Kṛṣṇa, .
Anīkasāha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Anīkavidāraṇa, brother of Jayadratha .
Anila1 . u, . Vāyu.
Anila2 = Śiva, Viṣṇu .
Anila3, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Anīla, a Serpent .
Anilābha = Śiva .
Anilaprabhava = Bhīma, q.v.
Anilasambhava, v. Agni.
Anilasārathi, v. Agni.
Anilātmaja1 = Bhīma, q.v.
Anilātmaja2 = Hanūmat, q.v.
Aṇiman .
Aṇīmāṇḍavya the ṛṣi Aṇīmāṇḍavya having been accused of theft, though innocent, and impaled, as a punishment for having in his childhood pierced a little fowl in a reed, cursed Dharma, saying that he should be born on earth in the Śūdra caste. Therefore Dharma was born as Vidura, .
Aṇīmāṇḍavyopākhyāna. The history of Māṇḍavya is more fully described. Suspicion had fallen upon him, because thieves had hid their plunder in his hermitage, while he was sitting for years with his arms upraised observing the vow of silence. When impaled, he by his ascetic power not only preserved his life, but summoned other ṛṣis to the scene, who came in the night in the shape of birds . Hearing that he was alive, the king asked his par and endeavoured to extract the stake from his body, but was obliged to cut it off outside the body. Māṇḍavya henceforth walked about with the stake in his life, and thereby conquered lokas unattainable by others and was called Aṇīmāṇḍavya . He ruled that an act should not be sinful when committed by one below the age of years .
Aṇimat .
Animiṣa1, a Suparṇa .
Animiṣa2 = Śiva, Viṣṇu .
Anindita = Śiva .
Anirdeśyavapus = Viṣṇu .
Aniruddha1 . b, .
Aniruddha2 = Viṣṇu .
Aniruddha3. Anu.
Anirviṇṇa = Viṣṇu .
Anīti = Śiva .
Anivartin = Viṣṇu .
Aṇīyasām aṇīyān = Kṛṣṇa.
Añjana1, a locality, .
Añjana2, an elephant . Añjanaka
Añjanābha, a mountain .
Añjanaka .
Añjanaparvan .
Aṅkṛti .
Anna = Śiva, Viṣṇu .
Annabhoktṛ = Śiva .
Annabhuj = Śiva .
Annada = Śiva .
Annāda = Viṣṇu .
Annapati = Śiva .
Annasraṣṭṛ = Śiva .
Anṛśaṃsa = Śiva.
Antacāra .
Antadevānāṃ = Śiva .
Antaka1 .
Antaka2 = Viṣṇu .
Antakajvalana, .
Antakāla . u, .
Antakṛt. u, .
Antaradvīpa, pl. .
Antarātman = Śiva .
Antardhāman. b, .
Antardhāna, a celestial weapon. c, .
Antarhitātman = Śiva .
Antarikṣacara, pl . ff, .
Antevasāyin, son of a Niṣādī and a Cāṇḍāla, .
Anu, son of Yayāti . e, Yayāti cursed his older sons Anu should be overcome by decrepitude and not be able to perform sacrifices before Agni, and his progeny should die as soon as they attained to youth, his sons were the Mlecchāḥ, .
Aṇu = Śiva, Viṣṇu .
Anucakra, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Anūcānā, an Apsaras .
Anucara, pl. . u, .
Anuśāsana .
Anuśāsanika .
. Yudhiṣṭhiras despondency at the slaughter of his kinsmen on the field of Kurukṣetra he enquired how he might be cleansed of his sins Bhīṣma comforted him by telling him that the soul is not the cause of our acts, citing the ancient story Gautamī lubdhaka vyāla Mṛtyu kāla saṃvāda, This evil has neither been of thy own creation, nor of Duryodhanas, but of Kālas. Yudhiṣṭhira became consoled . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira if any householder had ever succeeded in conquering Mṛtyu by virtue, Bhīṣma recited the ancient story Sudarśanopākhyāna, To a householder there is no higher divinity than the guest the blessings of an honoured guest are more efficacious than the merit of sacrifices. Whenever a deserving guest seeks the hospitality of an householder and is not honoured by him, he takes away all the virtues of the latter, giving him his sins . Blessing upon the reader . Yudhiṣṭhira asked how the Kṣattriya Viśvāmitra became a brahman, mentioning his destroying of the sons of Vasiṣṭha, etc and comparing the instance of Mataṅga, who was born as a Caṇḍāla and could not attain to brahmanhood . Bhīṣma related how in olden times Viśvāmitra attained to the position of a brahman and B. ṛ, i.e. Viśvāmitropākhyāna, . Yudhiṣṭhira wished to know the merits of compassion and the characteristics of devout men. Bhīṣma recited the ancient story of the discourse between Indra and the parrot who did not desert the blasted tree wherein it had been born, though the tree had withered, being pierced by a fowler with a poisoned arrow. The parrot, by his penances, knew Indra, and, being granted a boon, made Indra revive the tree and after death he came to the region of Indra . Yudhiṣṭhira enquired which of the two, Exertion and Destiny, is more powerful. Bhīṣma related the ancient story of the conversation of Vasiṣṭha and Brahmán, in which Brahmán showed the necessity of exertion, notwithstanding the force of destiny, under reference to the example of the gods, etc. Janamejaya, who followed in the footsteps of Indra, was checked and put n by the gods on account of his having killed a brahman woman the viprarṣi Vaiśampāyana was put n by the gods for killing a brahman by ignorance and a child . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma related the various fruits of various good acts. The Kuru princes became filled with wonder at his trine, as narrated by Ṛ. of old . Yudhiṣṭhira enquired who should be honoured and who liked, etc. Bhīṣmas answer about the duty of honouring good brahmans . Yudhiṣṭhiras enquiry about the misery that awaits those who refuse to make gifts to brahmans after having promised to give them. Bhīṣma set forth the various kinds of misery that await such men, citing the old narrative of the discourse between a jackal and an ape While both were human beings they were intimate friends after death one of them became a jackal and the other an ape, the former because he had not given to a brahman what he had promised to give, the latter because he used to appropriate the fruits belonging to brahmans. Bhīṣma had heard this from his preceptor and from Kṛṣṇa . Yudhiṣṭhira wished to know whether any fault is incurred by one who gives instruction to a person belonging to a low caste. Bhīṣma recited what he had heard certain Ṛ. say in days of yore instruction should not be imparted to one that belongs to a low or mean caste. He related the following instance that occurred in days of old There was a sacred hermitage on the Himavat, inhabited by Si Cā Vālakhilyas, etc. . A Śūdra asked the head of the college to initiate him into a life of renunciation, but he was refused. He then, at some distance, made a hut, etc for himself, and began to live according to rigid vows, made sacrifices to the gods, etc. . A Ṛ. used to come to him, and, at his request, promised to assist him in Pitṛ yajña. As the Śūdra placed the bṛsī towards the south with its head turned towards the west, Ṛ. told him to place the bṛsī with its head turned towards the east, and to sit with his face turned towards the north, and gave him all directions about the śrāddha as laid n in the ordinances, and after the rites had been accom plished Ṛ. returned to his own abode. After a long time the Śūdra ascetic met with his death in those woods, and in his next life took birth in the family of a great king the Ṛ. in his next life took birth in the family of a priest, and became well versed in the Atharvaveda, etc. the re born Śūdra was installed king after his fathers death. He appointed the reborn Ṛ. as his priest, and ruled his king righteously but every when he saw his priest, he smiled or laughed. The priest made him swear to tell him the truth, and he was then informed by him about their former births, where the penances of Ṛ. had all been frustrated by the instruction he had given to the Śūdra. In order that he might not obtain a still lower birth in his next life, he caused him to relinquish his present office as priest, make gifts, and observe vows, repairing to many sacred places, and at last, his soul having become purified, living in that very asylum where he had lived in his former birth, practising very severe penances thus he succeeded in attaining to the highest success . Yudhiṣṭhira enquired after the nature of the man or the woman in whom the goddess of Prosperity always dwells. Bhīṣma related the conversation between Rukmiṇī and the goddess Śrī, whom she once asked this question in the presence of Devakīs son . Yudhiṣṭhira enquired which of the two, man or woman, derives the greater pleasure from sexual union. Bhīṣma told the old story of the discourse between Bhaṅgāsvana and Śakra, i.e. Bhaṅgāsvanopākhyāna, . Yudhiṣṭhira asked how one should act in order to live happily both here and hereafter Bhīṣmas answer indicating the chief duties of commission and omission . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discoursed about the different names of Mahādeva and his puissance, but soon caused Kṛṣṇa to take up the topic before the conclave of Ṛ. with Vyāsa, just as Ṛ. Taṇḍin, the offspring of Brahmán, had in days of yore told the, names of Mahādeva before Brahmán in Brahmaloka. After twelve years had expired from the time when Pradyumna slew the Asura Śambara in days of yore, my spouse Jāmbavatī asked me to grant her a heroic son, saying By worshipping Mahādeva for twelve years and emaciating thyself in observing vows, thou hast begotten the sons Cāru deṣṇa, etc with Rukmiṇī . She prayed that Brahmán, etc would protect me took leave of Āhuka, etc and Garuḍa bore me to Himavat, where dismissed him there saw the asylum of Upamanyu Vaiyāghra padya, reverenced by G and K aned with Gaṅgā, etc. Upamanyu directed me to devote myself to penances and gratify Śiva, here where . and Ṛ. had in days of yore gratified him, who took his birth as Dā. Hiraṇyakaśipu, who was the father of Mandāra, irresistible even to Viṣṇus discus Sudarśana Śiva had further granted boons to the Dānavas Vidyutprabha, Śatamukha, and to Brahmán, etc. the sacrifice Saptakapāla, etc. . Having narrated his former relations to Mahādeva, Upamanyu there pointed out to me Si Ṛ . Y G Aps etc and said that in the sixth month from that time should behold Mahādeva and obtain twenty four boons from him and Umā. He gave me certain mantras, by reciting which was sure to behold Śaṅkara. On the eighth day underwent the dīkṣā, etc. for one month lived on fruits, etc. then beheld Mahādeva and Umā in a cloud, surrounded by, Rudras, etc praised by Ā . A Indra, etc uttered the Rathantara Sāman in the presence of Bhava . Innumerable masters of Yoga, etc were bowing n to him Sanatkumāra, etc were beheld by me standing there in their bodily forms Lp etc were seen to bow n to Śiva G. and Aps. sang and hymned him . etc were aing him in thought, word, and deed Brahmán, Śakra, etc looked at me, however, had not the power to look at Mahādeva. saluted Mahādeva Thou art, etc. . Śiva roared like a lion the innumerable brahmans there present, etc bowed n to Śiva. Śiva, looking at Umā, Indra, and myself, told me to ask for eight boons . Kṛṣṇa went on to enumerate the eight boons, including hundreds upon hundreds of children and a son Śāmba. Umā also granted me eight boons, and said that should have, wives, etc. and that, guests would daily feed at my palace. Then Śiva and Umā disappeared with their gaṇas. All this related to Upamanyu . Upamanyu said There was in the Kṛta age a Ṛ. Taṇḍi who devoutly aed the god for, years. He succeeded in beholding Mahādeva and praised him, and further said Neither Brahmán, etc know thee. Śiva said that Taṇḍi should be imperishable and eternal, etc and his son become the author of Sūtras, etc and granted him a boon. Taṇḍi said Let my devotion to thee be steady. Then the god disappeared. Then Taṇḍi came to my asylum and told me all that had happened to him. Dost thou hear all those celebrated names that Taṇḍi said unto me. Brahmán had at one time enumerated, names of Mahādeva in the scriptures, names of him occur. They are not known to all, but were uttered in days of yore by Brahmán for the purpose of aing Śiva. Having acquired them by the favour of Brahmán, Taṇḍi communicated them to me . Kṛṣṇa said B. ṛ. Upamanyu said shall ae with names uttered by Brahmán Ṛ in the Vedas and Vedāṅgas, applied by Taṇḍi, etc. . Blessing upon the reader Dā Y Rā Pś Yātudhānas, and Gh. can no injury to him . Vyāsa told Yudhiṣṭhira to gratify Śiva with this hymn consisting of, names Vyāsa had himself recited it in former days, when engaged in penances on Meru in order to obtain a son, and he had obtained the fulfilment of all his wishes. After this Kapila, etc obtained boons from Śiva. Then Jāmadagnya, etc narrated to Yudhiṣṭhira the boons they had been granted by Śiva. Vaiśampāyana continued Hearing these marvellous feats of Mahādeva related by the ascetics, Yudhiṣṭhira became amazed. Then Kṛṣṇa said to Yudhiṣṭhira Upa manyu said to me Unrighteous men, stained by Rajas and Tamas, not succeed in attaining to Īśāna even if a person lives in the enjoyment of every pleasure and luxury, yet he comes to be regarded as the equal of pure minded forest recluses if he is devoted to the Supreme Deity if Rudra is pleased with a person, he can confer upon him the position of either Brahmán or Keśava or Śakra with all the deities under him, or the sovereignty of the three worlds a person who devastates the whole universe s not become stained with sin if he aes and worships Śiva... Then Kṛṣṇa said to Yudhiṣṭhira Āditya, etc have sprung from that creator of all creatures indeed, that subtle Brahmán is the cause of life. Blessing upon the reader . Yudhiṣṭhira enquired after the purport of the scriptural injunction to husband and wife about the joint performance of all duties. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the discourse between Aṣṭāvakra and Diśā, i.e. Aṣṭāvakra Dik saṃvāda, . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discoursed on the question who is worthy of receiving gifts, etc quoting Ṛ. Mārkaṇḍeya, etc . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discussed the ordinances regulating the actions to be perpetrated towards the deities and the Pitṛs on the occasions of śrāddhas One should carefully perform all acts relating to the deities in the forenoon, and all acts relating to the Pitṛs in the afternoon that gift that is made untimely, etc is appropriated by Rā. the brahmans that must not be invited to śrāddhas, and those that should be invited, etc. Jātakarman, etc. . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discussed the circumstances under which a person may become guilty of brahmanicide without actually slaying a brahman . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about the holy places on earth, Bhīṣma repeated the enumeration of them made by Aṅgiras to Gautama, who put this same question, especially mentioning the result of bathing in Candrabhāgā, etc in Puṣkara, etc in Hiraṇyabindu, etc in Indratoyā, etc in Gaṅgādvāra, etc at Sapta gaṅga, etc at Kanyākūpa, etc in Devikā, etc Mahāgaṅgā, etc Vaimānika, etc in Śarastamba, etc Citrakūṭa, etc Mataṅgavāpī, etc Gaṅgāhrada, etc Gaṅgā Yamunayos tīrthaṃ, etc Marudgaṇa, etc Utpātaka, etc Aśmapṛṣṭha, etc Viśālā, etc Punarāvartanandā, etc Rāmahrada, etc Narmadā, etc Cāṇḍālikāśrama, etc Ujjānaka, etc Kālodaka, etc. . For the purpose of repairing to all the tīrthas in the world, one should mentally think of those amongst them that are wholly or almost inaccessible. Aṅgiras had obtained this discourse from Kaśyapa. Blessing upon the reader . Vaiśampāyana said Though equal unto Bṛhaspati in intelligence, Brahmán in forgiveness, Indra in progress, and Sūrya in energy, Bhīṣma had been overthrown in battle by Arjuna. Accompanied by his brothers, etc Yudhiṣṭhira asked him these questions. He was lying on a bed of arrows in expectation of the time of death. Many M. ṛ. had come there to see him Atri, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira with his brothers duly worshipped those Ṛ who then sat n and conversed about Bhīṣma, and then, taking leave of Bhīṣma and the Pāṇḍavas, made themselves invisible. The Pāṇḍavas then waited upon Bhīṣma, and seeing the quarters of the sky blazing forth with splenr on account of the penances of the Ṛṣis, they became filled with wonder, and talked it over with Bhīṣma. Vaiśampāyana continued After that conversation was over, Yudhiṣṭhira touched Bhīṣmas feet with his head, and then resumed his questions relating to morality and righteousness. Yudhiṣṭhira asked which countries, retreats, mountains, and rivers are foremost in point of sanctity. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of a conversation between a brahman who was a śiloñcha vṛtti householder and a siddha Ṛ who roamed over the earth and once had passed the night in the house of the śilavṛtti, who, when they had conversed on subjects connected with the Vedas and Upaniṣads, asked him this very question, and was instructed by him about the superior sanctity of Gaṅgā. Then the siddha ascended the firmament, and the śilavṛtti sought the protection of Gaṅgā and attained to great success. Yudhiṣṭhira, etc were filled with delight. Blessing upon the reader . Yudhiṣṭhira asked how a Kṣattriya, Vaiśya, or Śūdra may acquire the position of a brahman. Bhīṣma said that the brahmanhood cannot be acquired except by birth, relating an old story of a conversation between Mataṅga and a she ass, etc i.e. Indra Mataṅga saṃvāda, . Yudhiṣṭhira mentioned that in former times the position of a brahman was acquired by Viśvāmitra, and asked how king Vītahavya in ancient times succeeded in obtaining brahmanhood. Bhīṣma told the Vītahavyo pākhyāna, . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira as to who are worthy of reverent homage, Bhīṣma repeated the old narrative of the discourse between Nārada and Vāsudeva, who asked him the above question. Nārada answered worship them who constantly worship Varuṇa, etc . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about the merits of those persons who grant protection to living creatures, Bhīṣma told the Śyenakapotākhyāna, . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira which act is the most important of all those that have been laid n for a king, Bhīṣma said it was the worship of brahmans they are older than P men, U and Rā and incapable of being vanquished by P G Rā As or Pś. it is owing to the absence of brahmans that the Kṣattriya tribes, the Śakas, etc have become degraded into the state of Śūdras the great Ṛ. have said that brahmanicide is a heinous sin they have Soma for their king this was said to me by Nārada Āditya, etc enter the body of the brahman and take what the brahman eats in the house where brahmans not eat, P. refuse to eat examples of brahmans who have conquered Kṣattriyas in this connection the old story of the conversation between Vāsudeva and the Earth, who instructed the former, is told examples of discomfiture arising from acts hurtful to the brahmans, . Bhīṣmas characterisation of brahmans the Mekalas, etc and numerous other kṣattriya tribes have become degraded to the state of Śūdras through the wrath of the brahmans having dis regarded the brahmans, As. have been obliged to take refuge in the depths of the ocean through the favour of the brahmans . have become denizens of heaven comparisons with brahmans the brahmans are incapable of being subjugated . Bhīṣma told the old history of the discourse between Śakra and As. Śambara, who ascribed his success to his never cherishing any ill feeling towards the brahmans, referring to the encounter between . and As. in days of old Śambaras father had obtained instruction from Candramas as to how the brahmans attain to success. Śakra began to worship the brahmans, and therefore succeeded in obtaining the supremacy of the gods . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discussed the comparative eligibility of brahmans for receiving presents one pays off the debt one owes to the gods by performing sacrifices, to P. by procreating children, to the brahmans by making presents unto them, and to the guests by feeding them . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about the disposition of women, Bhīṣma told the old story of the discourse between . ṛ. Nārada and the courtezan Aps. Iañcacūḍā, in ancient times, in the region of Brahmán, . Yudhiṣṭhira observed that women are in possession of the illusive power of As. Śambara, etc and the political knowledge of Śukra and Bṛhaspati it seems to me that Bṛhaspati and other great thinkers evolved the science of politics from observation of the understanding of women . Bhīṣma approved of what Yudhiṣṭhira had said There is no creature more sinful than woman she is the illusion that Dai. Maya created, etc. am told that all persons of the human race in course of natural progress attain to the state of gods this circumstance alarmed the gods they repaired to Brahmán, who created women by an Atharvan rite in a previous creation women were all virtuous but those that sprang from this creation by Brahmán with the aid of an illusion became sinful Brahmán bestowed the desire of enjoying all kinds of carnal pleasures upon them. Bhīṣma repeated the old story of how, in days of yore, Vipula had succeeded in restraining his preceptors spouse, i.e. Vipulopākhyāna, . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma explained upon what person one should bestow ones daughter in marriage the different forms of marriage various ordinances about marriage, quoting Prajāpati and Manu and the Maruts and the Ṛṣis what constitutes or completes the union of marriage the passing and acceptance of a er not constitute marriage. Bhīṣma referred to the opinion of Bāhlīka and his own conduct in liberating Ambā, whom he had abducted for his brother Vicitravīrya, having defeated the Māgadhas, etc quoting prince Satyavat . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma expounded how a girls kinsmen should act after having received a er if the giver goes away without marrying and s not return for some time, comparing the instance of Sāvitrī and quoting Sukratu the unrighteous dereliction of eternal usage is regarded as the practice of the Asuras. Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira upon what authority the wealth of men is inherited by others when they happen to have daughters, Bhīṣma explained the different rules of succession, and recited some verses sung in days of yore by Yama about the man who sells his son or bestows his daughter for a er the Ārṣa marriage is also a sale even a human being with whom one has no relationship of blood should not form the subject of sale a verse of Prācetasa how women should be treated those houses that are cursed by women meet with destruction and ruin as if scorched by some Atharvan rite Manu, on the eve of his departure for heaven, entrusted women to the care and protection of men a verse sung by a princess of the house of the Videha king Janaka on the duties of women . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discussed the comparative eligibility of different kinds of sons to the fathers inheritance, quoting Manu and Ṛ and M. ṛ. Kaśyapa Mārīca if a brahman, led by lust, acts in a different way, he shall come to be regarded as a Cāṇḍāla among brahmans . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discussed the duties of persons born in the mixed castes in the beginning Prajāpati created the four castes for the sake of sacrifice the son begotten by a brahman upon a Śūdra wife is called Pāraśava a Kṣattriyas son with a Śūdra wife is called an Ugra, etc. only the duties of the four principal castes have been laid n in the scriptures as regards the others, the scriptures are entirely silent. Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discussed the signs by which the origin of men of impure birth may be known . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discussed the different kinds of sons Niruktaja, etc . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about compassion, etc Bhīṣma told the ancient story of a conversation between Nahuṣa and M. ṛ. Cyavana, i.e. Cyavanopākhyāna, including Cyavana Kuśika saṃvāda . Yudhiṣṭhira became stupefied with grief at the thought of the millions of men he had slaughtered he feared that the Pāṇḍavas would have to sink in hell, their heads hanging nwards, and desired to practise severe penances. Bhīṣma expounded the different rewards of different kinds of acts. Yudhiṣṭhira desired to attain the end that is reserved to heroes, and no longer expressed any disgust at leading a householders mode of life, and all the Pāṇḍavas with Draupadī approved of his words . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma spoke of the rewards attached to the planting of trees and the digging of wells and tanks men, G P U and Rā etc all resort to a tank full of water as their refuge the same and Ṛ. all have recourse to trees . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discussed what gift is distinguished before all other gifts . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discussed which gift is more meritorious, that bestowed on one who asks for it or that given to an unsoliciting person . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma explained where one meets with the rewards attached to gifts and sacrifices, adducing the instances of king Śibi and Manu . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira what is the best of all gifts, Bhīṣma declared it to be earth Mṛtyu, etc are incapable of touching the person that makes a gift of earth the verse hearing which Jāmadagnya gave away the whole earth to Kaśyapa is quoted a gift of earth is a high expiation for the sin of those who betake themselves to Atharvan rites in order to injuries to others Ā etc applaud the man who makes a gift of earth he further told the old narrative of a discourse between Bṛhaspati and Indra having aed Viṣṇu in sacrifices, Indra put this same question to Bṛhaspati, and was instructed by him that man who s not keep a promise of a gift of earth, or who recalls it, is tied with the noose of Varuṇa at the command of Death those men have never to go to Yama who honour and worship brahmans, etc. that king who makes gifts of earth sports in bliss in heaven, aed by . and G and is approached by Aps etc. Indra gave the whole earth to Bṛhaspati if these verses are recited at a śrāddha neither Rā. nor As. can succeed in appropriating any share of the offerings made . Asked by Yudhiṣ ṭhira as to what gifts kings should make, what gifts immediately gratify the brahmans, what fruits attach to them, what gifts are productive of rewards both here and hereafter, Bhīṣma related the answer he had received from Nārada when he put the same question to him a gift of food made to even a Cāṇḍāla or a is never lost in a former Kalpa Prajāpati said that food is amṛta, etc. Agni and Soma in the body create and maintain the vital seed thus the sun and wind and the vital seed spring and act from food description of the regions of heaven reserved to those that make gifts of food . Yudhiṣṭhira enquired after the conjunctions of the planets and stars in relation to gifts. Bhīṣma repeated the ancient narrative of the discourse between Devakī and Ṛ. Nārada at Dvārakā, where Nārada answered this very question. Devakī in her turn told it to her daughters in law . Various merits of various kinds of gifts, Bhīṣma referring to Atri, etc. ghee is said to gratify Bṛhaspati, etc . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma commented on the gift of sandals and shoes, and of sesame, and land, and kine, and food sesame seeds were created by Brahmán as the best food of the Pitṛs, etc. Āpastamba. etc have all ascended to heaven by means of making gifts of sesame seeds. Once the gods, desirous of performing a sacrifice on the earth, repaired to Brahmán on the Himavat and obtained from him a clod of earth there came Agastya, etc. the gods attached one sixth of the merit arising from their sacrifice to the gift of earth in days of yore king Rantideva performed a grand sacrifice, in which an immense number of kine were slaughtered from the juice of their skins the river Carmaṇvatī was formed king Rantideva, in days of yore, ascended to heaven on account of his having given gifts of food the cow should never be given away for slaughter what kine should not be given to brahmans he referred to Parāśara the seasons when gifts of food produce particular merits . Asked by Yudhiṣhṭhira, Bhīṣma dealt with the merits that attach to gifts of drink, quoting Sāvitrī and Lomaśa and Manu, and mentioning Śibi Soma, etc has sprung from water . have amṛta for their food, N. have Sudhā, P. have Svadhā . Yudhiṣṭhira asked about the merits that attach to gifts of sesame and lamps for lighting darkness, as also of food and robes Bhīṣma told the narrative of the conversation between a brahman and Yama, in ancient times, in the large town of Parṇaśālā between Yamunā and Gaṅgā, at the foot of the Yamunā hills one day Yama commanded a messenger of his to bring the person named Śarmin of Agastyas race from this town, not confounding him with another of the same gotra he should be worshipped with respect. The messenger did the very reverse Yama ordered this man to be taken back and Śarmin to be brought the former was, however, first instructed by Yama regarding gifts. Then the messenger conveyed him back and fetched Śarmin Yama, having given him the same instructions, dismissed him to be taken back to his abode. The giver of a lamp is regarded as benefiting the Pitṛs and Yama it enhances the power of vision of P and ones self citing Manu about a gift of gems . Bhīṣma, at Yudhiṣṭhiras solicitation, reverted to the topic of the merits of gifts, with especial reference to the gift of earth a cow should never be given to a person that is not righteous . The tale of the calamity that befell king Nṛga, who had unwittingly taken a cow belonging to a brahman and given it away to another brahman. Formerly, when Dvāravatī was founded, a huge lizard was seen in a well Kṛṣṇa took it out and learnt that it was king Nṛga, who in days of old had performed many sacrifices and repeatedly made gifts of hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of kine to the brahmans a brahmans cow had accidentally come among Nṛgas and been given to another brahman, whose weak child it nourished neither of them would take the most exorbitant gifts in exchange after death, when he came to the region of the Pitṛs, Yama let him choose as his punishment for this little sin to become a lizard for, years, till he was rescued by Vāsudeva. Then Nṛga mounted a celestial car and proceeded to heaven a verse of Kṛṣṇas is quoted . Yudhiṣṭhira asked Bhīṣma to further detail the merits attainable by gifts of kine. Bhīṣma told the old story of Ṛ. Uddālaki and his son Nāciketa, whom he had cursed to go and see Yama, because Nāciketa had not found the articles he was sent for, as they had been washed away by the current. Nāciketa fell n, deprived of life Uddālaki indulged in lamentations when the night came, Nāciketa, drenched with his fathers tears, revived, and in the midst of the Ṛṣis told that he had been honoured in Yamas delightful palace, which extended over, yojanas Yama said that was not dead, but had only come to see Yama in compliance with the words of my father Yama, at his request, had caused him to be mounted on a vehicle and showed him all those delightful regions that are reserved for the righteous, who make gifts in the world of men, especially gifts of kine, etc. in the absence of kine, a person by making gifts of a substitute of kine wins the merit of making gifts of kine gifts of kine on kāmyāṣṭamī, etc. then took leave of Yama and have now come back . Yudhiṣṭhira asked about the regions of kine, which are the residence of givers of kine. Bhīṣma related the old tale of the conversation between Brahmán and Indra, who, seeing that the residents of the regions of kine surpassed the denizens of heaven, asked Brahmán about them . The comments of Brahmán to Indra on the subject of kine, reference being made to Ṛṣis, etc. . Asked by Indra, Brahmán spoke about the end of him who consciously steals a cow or sells one from motives of cupidity. Bhīṣma explained how Brahmáns discourse had been handed n from Indra to Bhīṣma Brahmán Indra Daśaratha Rāma Lakṣmaṇa the Ṛṣis from generation to generation Bhīṣmas preceptor Bhīṣma. Blessing upon the reader . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma explained the rewards that attach to the observance of different kinds of vows many millions of Ṛ. are residing in Brahmaloka . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma commented upon the ordinances that regulate gifts of kine, quoting the instruction given by Bṛhaspati to king Māndhātṛ kine have that in them that partakes of the nature of both Sūrya and Soma application of the words bhavitavyā, etc. all the three, etc and he who is well conversant with the Mahābhārata attain to the regions of Viṣṇu and Soma names of kings who have attained to regions of great felicity as the reward of such gifts of kine as they made according to the instructions of Bṛhaspati Uśīnara, etc. . Vaiśampāyana said King Yudhiṣṭhira did all that Bhīṣma wished he from that time began always to make gifts of kine and to support himself on grains of barley and on cow dung as his food and drink, and he began to sleep from that day on the bare earth, and gave up the practice of harnessing kine to his vehicles, and used cars drawn by horses . Vaiśampāyana continued Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma once more went into detail on the merits attaching to the gift of kine a Kapilā cow is the best of all kine Yudhiṣṭhira asked why Bhīṣma said he had heard old men tell the following story In days of yore Brahmán commanded Dakṣa to create living creatures Dakṣa, in the first instance, created food he drank amṛta, a fragrant eructation came out, and gave birth to the cow Surabhi, whose daughters came to be regarded as the mothers of the world they were all Kapilās some froth from the calves fell upon the head of Mahādeva, who, filled with wrath, turned his third eye towards them, which produced various complexions in them some escaped to the region of Soma and retained their colour. Dakṣa informed Śiva that this froth was amṛta and not impure Candramas, after drinking the amṛta, pours it out again but it is not, on that account, regarded as impure. Dakṣa then presented Mahādeva with a bull and certain kine Mahā deva was gratified and made that bull his vehicle, and after the form of that bull ated the device on his standard it was on that occasion also that the gods, uniting together, made Mahādeva the lord of animals. Cows yield Soma in the form of milk. Blessing upon the reader. Vaiśampāyana continued Yudhiṣṭhira and his brother began to make gifts of both bulls and cows of different colours to brahmans, Yudhiṣṭhira performing many sacrifices . Bhīṣma said In days of yore, king Saudāsa of Ikṣvākus race asked his purohita Ṛ. Vasiṣṭha what is most sacred and most productive of merit Vasiṣṭha enlarged upon the mystery relating to kine svāhā and vaṣaṭ are for ever established in kine what is meant by Gomatī . Continuation of Vasiṣṭhas discourse on the pre eminent sanctity of kine the diverse merits attaching to gifts of different kinds of kine Brahmaloka, etc . Vasiṣṭha commented on the purificatory mantras having reference to kine those who make gifts of, kine, departing from this world, proceed to the region of G. and Aps where there are many palatial mansions made of gold, and Vasor dhārā ... by giving away a Kapilā cow, etc one succeeds in entering the palace of Yama that is so difficult to enter. Bhīṣma said Saudāsa, honouring these words of Ṛ. Vasiṣṭha, made gifts of a very large number of kine unto the brahmans, and attained to many worlds of felicity in the next life . Yudhiṣṭhira asked what is the most sacred of all sacred things in the world, and which is the highest of all sanctifying objects. Bhīṣma said Kine are the most excellent of all objects, etc. Māndhātṛ, etc always used to give away kine in thousands, and have attained to such regions as are unattainable even by the gods he quoted a discourse delivered of old. Śuka asked Ṛ. Vyāsa what is the foremost of all sacrifices, and was instructed by him, who praised kine and described the region of kine which the blessed only attain Aps. always entertain them there those regions that have for their lords Pūṣan and the Maruts are attained to by givers of kine they attain to wealth like that of Varuṇa himself one should daily recite these mantras declared by Prajāpati himself. The man who, for a month, subsists upon the gruel of barley picked up every day from cow dung, becomes free of sins as grave as the slaughter of a brahman after their defeat at the hands of Dai the gods practised this penance, owing to which they regained their position the efficaciousness of the Gomatī mantras. Bhīṣma said From that time Śuka began to worship kine every day . Yudhiṣṭhira asked how it is that the dung of the cow is possessed of Śrī. Bhīṣma told the old story of the conversation between the kine and Śrī, who once in a beautiful form entered a herd of cows, saying The Daityas, forsaken by me, have been lost for ever the gods Indra, etc having obtained me, are sporting in joy and will so for ever Ṛ. and . only when they are favoured by me become crowned with success she wished to reside in the kine they refused her, saying she was fickle and restless. Śrī said Dā G Pś U Rā and men succeed in obtaining me only after the severest austerities they agreed that she should live in their urine and dung . Bhīṣma continued his discourse on kine, repeating the old tale of the discourse between Brahmán and Indra, after Dai. had been defeated and all creatures grew in prosperity then once Ṛ G K U Rā As the birds, and the Prajāpatis all aed Brahmán Nārada, etc sang, etc. Indra asked him about the region of kine Brahmán said that Indra had always disregarded kine, and commented to him on the superiority of kine. He explained to him why kine have descended to earth In days of yore, when in the Deva yuga the Dānavas became lords of the three worlds, Aditi underwent the severest austerities and begot Viṣṇu seeing Aditi perform penances, Surabhī, the daughter of Dakṣa, also underwent austerities on Kailāsa, in yoga, standing upon one leg for, years Ṛ and M. U. became scorched and repaired thither with me as she did not herself ask a favour, granted her the boon of immortality, and that she should dwell in Goloka, while her offspring, engaged in ng good acts, would reside in the world of men . Bhīṣma continued From that time Śakra began to worship kine every day. Blessing upon the reader, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira asked why gold, in the Śrutis, is declared to be even superior to kine as a dakṣiṇā, and what gold is, etc. Bhīṣma related the circumstances connected with the origin of gold When my father Śāntanu was dead, went to Gaṅgādvāra to perform his śrāddha Gaṅgā came and rendered me great help a handsome arm, aned with aṅgadas, etc rose up piercing the ground the P. did not come in their visible forms to take the cake, therefore, dis regarding the hand, offered the whole cake on blades of kuśa grass, according to rule then the arm of my father vanished. In that night the Pitṛs appeared to me in a dream, pleased by my adherence to the rules, whereby had honoured the authority of the scriptures, etc. had made gifts of earth and kine now should make gifts of gold. Listen now to this old story, that extends the period of life for him who listens to it it was first recited to Rāma Jāmadagnya, who in former days exterminated the Kṣattriyas twenty one times by performing a horse sacrifice he became free from sin, but he still failed to attain to perfect lightness of heart he repaired to Ṛ. and then to Vasiṣṭha, etc. they told him that in days of yore Agni burnt all the world from his seed sprang gold he should make gifts of gold Vasiṣṭha in especial commented on gold it is the essence of Agni and Soma, etc. such is the teaching of the Smṛtis in churning the entire universe a mass of energy was found hence gold is superior G U Rā men, and Pś. keep it with care Agni is all the deities in one, and Agni is the essence of gold. formerly heard this in the Purāṇa it represents the speech of Prajāpati himself. Then he related Suvarṇot patti, . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma related Tārakavadho pākhyāna, . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma ex plained the ordinances respecting the śrāddha. As men, G Pś K every one should always worship P. P. are worshipped before the gods. The merits and demerits of the different lunar days for performing the śrāddha st days of the bright fortnight are auspicious all the young men in the family of him who performs it on the day meet with death, and he himself becomes entangled in war the day of the new moon and days of the dark fortnight are auspicious the dark fortnight is better than the bright one, the afternoon better than the forenoon . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma explained what, if presented to P becomes inexhaustible and eternal, and the periods for which different offerings presented at śrāddhas gratify the P quoting some verses sung by P. and communicated to him by Sanatkumāra, recommending pāyasa with ghee on the day under Maghāḥ during the Suns southward course, and, under the same con stellation, meat of goat, etc and śrāddhas at Gayā, the different merits acquired by persons by performing optional śrāddhas under various nakṣatras, and which were explained by Yama to Śaśabindu by per forming such a śrāddha under the Kṛttikās, a man acquires the merit of a sacrifice after establishing the sacred fire, and ascends to heaven with his children, etc. . Having listened to these ordinances about the śrāddha, Śaśabindu acted accordingly, and easily subjugated and ruled the earth . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma explained to what kinds of brahmans the offerings made at śrāddhas should be given away, quoting the Vaikhānasa Ṛṣis . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira by whom the śrāddha was first conceived, etc in the time when the world was only peopled by the descendants of Bhṛgu and Aṅgiras, etc Bhīṣma said Brahmán Atri Dattātreya Nimi Śrīmat. After, years Śrīmat died, having undergone the severest austerities Nimi, filled with grief, collected various agreeable objects on the day of the moon, and the next morning he con ceived the idea of a śrāddha on the day of the new moon he invited a number of respected brahmans, gave food to seven such brahmans, and made an offering of cakes of rice to his dead son, uttering his name and family . He then became filled with regret, having e an act that was not laid n in the scriptures he thought of Atri, who came and comforted him, saying that this sacrifice in honour of the Pitṛs had been laid n and its rites regulated by Brahmán himself in days of yore one should pour out libations to Agni, etc. the gods named Pitṛs Uṣṇapas were created by Svayambhū and consist of seven classes when they are honoured by a śrāddha, they become freed from sin the Viśvedevas, having Agni for their mouth, they are eternal . Articles that should not be offered at śrāddhas. From the place of a śrāddha a Cāṇḍāla and a Śvapaca should be excluded, as also one who wears yellow clothes, a leper, an outcast, etc. Having said this to Ṛ. Nimi, Atri went back to the celestial palace of Pitāmaha . After Nimi had acted in this way, M. ṛ. performed a śrāddha. The Pitṛs and gods became afflicted with indigestion in consequence of the offerings made by persons of the four castes. They repaired to Soma, and thence to Svayambhū, and thence to Agni. Agni told them to eat those offerings together with him. It is for this reason that in making offerings at śrāddhas a share is first offered to Agni then also the Brahma Rākṣasas cannot any injury to the śrāddha but the Rakṣases fly away from it . The cake should first be offered to the father, then to the grandfather, then to the great grandfather at each cake the Sāvitrī should be uttered a woman of another gotra, etc should not assist at a śrāddha while crossing a river, one should offer oblations of water to ones P and also on the day of the new moon this gives prosperity, etc. Brahmán, etc are great masters of yoga and P. . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma said that brahmans who are observant of vows not mentioned in the Vedas may eat at śrāddhas without incurring sin but not so those who are observant of vows mentioned in the Vedas. Penance is not really identifiable with fast one should not torment ones own body renunciation is the best of penances the brahman should eat Vighasa or Aṃṛta one should only eat morning and evening at the prescribed hours, etc. such men obtain felicity in the abode of Brahmán in the company of Aps. and G. If the giver happens to be unrighteous, the receiver sinks into hell. In this connection an old tale of a con versation between Vṛṣādarbhi and the seven Ṛṣis is told Bisastainyopākhyāna . Bhīṣma said In this connection the old story of the oaths on the occasion of a tīrthayātrā is told . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira by whom the custom of giving umbrellas and sandals at śrāddhas was introduced, Bhīṣma related the story of the discourse between Jamadagni and Sūrya . Do thou, therefore, give away umbrellas and shoes to brahmans. He who gives away a white umbrella with ribs to a brahman attains to eternal felicity after death in Śakra loka, being respected by brahmans, Aps and . . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about the duties of a householder, Bhīṣma recited the old story of Vāsudeva and the goddess Pṛthivī, who instructed Vāsudeva on this very topic Ṛ P and men should be worshipped... he should perform an Agnī Ṣoma, Vaiśvadeva, and Dhānvantarya offering, and separately an offering to Prajānāṃ pati and bali to Yama, etc. he should daily perform a śrāddha he should take his food last of all he should with madhuparka honour a king, ṛtvij, guru, father in law, and snātaka in the evening and morning he should place food on the ground for s, śvapacas, and birds this is called the Vaiśvadeva offering. Vāsudeva acted accordingly . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma, in order to explain the gift of lamps, flowers, and incense, told the old story of the discourse between the Prajāpati Manu Svāyambhuva and the learned and noble brahman Suvarṇa on the golden mountain Meru. Asked by Suvarṇa about the above named topic, Manu related the old history of the discourse between Śukra Bhārgava and the Asura king Bali Vairocana, who ruled the three worlds. Asked by Bali about this very topic, Śukra discoursed on the plants, of which some are amṛta and some poison some are acceptable to As some to the gods, Rā U Y men, P. garlands of water flowers should be offered to G N and Y. plants with red flowers and keen scent and having thorns have been laid n in the Atharvans as fit for incantation in order to injure foes, etc. . become gratified with the scent of flowers, Y. and Rā. with their sight, N. with their touch, men with all three. Among incenses, all exudations are agreeable to the gods that of Aquilaria Agallocha to Y Rā and N. that of Boswellia serrata, etc to Dai etc. Andhatamas, darkness, and the suns southward course, one should give lights during the suns northward course . are resplendent, Rā. dark hence one should always give lights, etc. thereby a man attains to the same world as the celestial lights . The merits of bali offerings made to Y U men, Bhūtas, and Rā. Y Rā Pn P etc are supported by the food offered by the householder the bali offered to Y. and Rā. should be rich in blood and meat, wines and spirits, etc. balis with lotuses and utpalas are agreeable to N. sesame seeds with sugar to the Bhūtas. He who eats without first serving brahmans and gods and guests and children, should be known as a Rā. Thus said Kāvya Bhārgava to Bali then Manu Suvarṇa Nārada Bhīṣma . Yudhi ṣṭhira once more questioned Bhīṣma on this subject Bhīṣma told the old story of the discourse between Nahuṣa and Agastya and Bhṛgu . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira where those men go who steal articles belonging to brahmans, Bhīṣma related the old conversation between a Cāṇḍāla and a Kṣattriya, who wondered that the old Cāṇḍāla, whose body was besmeared with the dust raised by s and asses, without minding that dust, was anxious to wash off the small drops of milk that had fallen upon his body the Cāṇḍāla related that formerly some kine belonging to a brahman were stolen, and some milk from them fell upon some Soma plants that grew by the roadside the king who performed the sacrifice with this Soma, the brahmans who drank its juice, those who had assisted at the sacrifice, and those who drank milk, etc in the palace of this king, had to fall into hell, as also the sons and grandsons of those who had stolen them, and the queen, although she treated the animals with great care. The Cāṇḍāla himself, who had lived in the observance of brahmacarya in that place, and whose alms had been sprinkled with the milk of the kine, had in this life become a Cāṇḍāla. It is for this reason that the Soma plants become unsaleable, and the persons who sell and who purchase them both sink into the Raurava hell, when they repair to the region of Yama, etc. Behold also this miserable In a former life the Cāṇḍāla was born in a noble family, but out of pride he ate the meat attached to the vertebral column of animals, and thence he had attained to his present state in consequence of some meritorious act in a former life, he had retained the memory of his previous existences. Asked by the Cāṇḍāla, the kṣattriya told him to give up his life for the sake of a brahman. This the Cāṇḍāla did in a battle for protecting a brahmans wealth, and attained to a desirable end . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira whether there is a difference of position among righteous men after death, Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the conversation between the muni Gautama and Indra . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira what constitutes the highest penance, Bhīṣma said that there is no penance superior to abstention from food, and told the old story of the conversation between king Bhagīratha and Brahmán. Bhagīratha had transcended the world of the gods, that of kine, and that of the Ṛṣis beholding this, Brahmán asked him how he had attained to that region, where neither gods, nor G nor men succeed in coming without having practised the severest austerities Bhagīratha enumerated his sacrifices, his penances on the Jāhnavī, etc. those on the banks of Sarayū, etc he gave away millions of kine to the brahmans. It is not through the merits of those acts that have attained to this region, but through the vow of fast, which had been known to Indra, who had kept it secret, but which Bhārgava Uśanas had learnt through penance all brahmans and Ṛ. gratified me, saying that should repair to Brahmaloka. Bhagīratha was honoured by Brahmán . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discussed the reason why, a mans period of life being said to extend over years, one becomes short lived or long lived one should awake at the Brāhma muhūrta Ṛ. by aing the two twilights became long lived one should avoid atheism, calumniating the Vedas, censuring the gods, etc. one should also wash ones feet before sitting n to recite the Vedas or to eat any food one should perform the homas for propitiating the gods and recite the Sāvitra mantras persons conversant with ancient history cite a gāthā sung by Yama in days of old he who studies at forbidden times, loses his Veda and shortens his life nor should one eat at the śrāddha of an enemy the spots of the hand named Brāhma tīrtha, etc. having drunk water thrice, etc one should worship the P. and gods according to the ordinances of the Vedas a brahman should perform in all the purificatory acts with the Brāhma tīrtha one should never perform any act in honour of P. in the night time one should wash his head before performing any act in honour of P. or gods one should never perform under the constellation of ones nativity, nor under the two Proṣṭhapadas, nor under Āgneya, nor under fierce, nor under those that are hostile, or those mentioned in the Jyotiṣa a woman of the same pravara, etc should be avoided one should accomplish all acts ordained in the Veda or by the Brāhmaṇas one should study the Dhanurveda and the Veda you should know the science of reasoning, the science of words, the Gāndharvaśāstra, and the Kalās, one should always hear the Purāṇa and itihāsas and the narratives that exist, and the biographies of high minded persons good conduct is superior to all lore this fame producing, etc has been uttered by Brahmán out of compassion on all creatures . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma expounded how the eldest brother should behave towards his younger brothers and the younger ones towards the eldest the upādhyāya is superior to ācāryas the father to upādhyāyas the mother to fathers or to the whole earth there is no guru equal to the mother . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira if only brahmans and kṣattriyas should observe fasts, Bhīṣma related what Ṛ. Aṅgiras had said to him in answer to this same question, indicating the merits of fast on different days and different months, by which fasts the merit of different sacrifices are acquired, or the abode of the Aps or Brahmaloka attained there is no penance superior to fast by fasts the gods became denizens of heaven, and Ṛ. attained to the highest success witness Viśvāmitra, and Cyavana, etc who attained to heaven through fasts. In former days Aṅgiras declared so to M. ṛ. . Yudhiṣṭhira, saying that sacrifices are incapable of being performed by people that are poor, as they require a large store of diverse kinds of articles, wherefore the merit attaching to them can only be acquired by kings and princes, asked Bhīṣma about acts fraught with merit equal to that of sacrifices and capable of being performed by persons destitute of means. Bhīṣma related the ordinances about fasts that were promulgated by Aṅgiras the regions attainable by them and the sacrifices they are equal to . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about that which is the foremost of all tīrthas, Bhīṣma mentioned and described Mānasa tīrtha but also the tīrthas of the earth are possessed of merit by reciting the name of a tīrtha, by bathing there, and by gladdening P. there, one casts off ones sins and goes to heaven . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira as to what is the highest, etc kind of fast, Bhīṣma said A. B. C. . Mārgaśīrṣa Keśava... Horse sacrifice becomes free from all his sins. Pauṣa... Nārāyaṇa... Vājapeya... the highest success. Māgha... Mādhava... Rājasūya... rescues his race. Phālguna... Govinda... Atirātra... Somaloka. Caitra... Viṣṇu.. Pauṇḍarīka... Devaloka. Vaiśākha... Madhusūdana Agniṣṭoma... Somaloka. Jyaiṣṭha... Trivikrama Gavāṃ medhaḥ rejoices with Aps. Aṣāḍha... Vāmana... Naramedha... rejoices with Aps. Śrāvaṇa... Śrīdhara... Pañcayajñāḥ a vimāna. Bhādrapada Hṛṣīkeśa... Santrāmaṇi... becomes purified. Āśvika... Padmanābha, cars... Kārttika... Dāmodara... all sacrifices... The result of aing Kṛṣhṇa as Puṇḍarīkākṣa, etc. . At the conclusion of ones vow, one should feed a number of brahmans or make gifts of ghee to them. Viṣṇu has said that there is no fast superior to that . Vaiśampāyana said Approaching Bhīṣma, who was lying on his bed of arrows, Yudhiṣṭhira asked how one s acquire beauty, etc. Bhīṣma said that a Candravrata should be commenced in Mārgaśīrṣa, when the moon comes in conjunction with Mūla Mūla being in his feet, Rohiṇī being in his calf, Aśvinī being in his knee joints, Āṣāḍhau being in his thighs, Phālgunī being in his anus, Kṛttikāḥ being in his waist, Bhādrapada being in his navel, Revatī being in his eyes, Dhaniṣṭhāḥ being in his back, Anurādhā being in his belly, Viśākhāḥ being in his arms, Hasta being in his hands, Punarvasū being in his fingers, Aśleṣāḥ being in his nails, Jyeṣṭhā being in his neck, Śravaṇa being in his ears, Puṣya being in his mouth, Svāti being in his teeth and lips, Śatabhiṣā being in his smile, Maghā being in his nose, Mṛgaśiras being in his eye, Citra being in his forehead, Bharaṇī being in his head, Ārdrā being in his hair. Then gifts of ghee to learned brahmans one becomes as accomplished as the full moon . Yudhiṣṭhira asked, what regulates rebirth, etc. Bhīṣma directed him to ask Bṛhaspati, as none else was capable of explaining the matter. Vaiśampāyana said While they were thus speaking Bṛhaspati came from heaven Yudhiṣṭhira with Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc honoured him then Yudhiṣṭhira asked him, what is truly the friend of mortal creatures, and what follows man to the next world. Bṛhaspati said Righteousness. Yudhiṣṭhira asked, how righteousness can accompany the dead body. Bṛhaspati said that the soul obtains a new body according to its merit, Yama, etc being the witnesses, etc. Deities dwelling in the body, viz. earth, etc. . After birth Jīva receives woe and death from the messengers of Yama if imbued with unrighteousness, Jīva has to go to the inions of Yama, and after suffering great misery there, he has to undergo rebirth as an animal, or as some other kind of being, as declared in the Vedas and the scriptures with the histories . In the regions of Yama there are places worthy of being the abodes even of the deities, and which are equal to Brahmaloka, but also such as are worse than . Different forms in which Jīva has to take birth in consequence of different acts . heard all this in days of old from Brahmán himself in the midst of the surarṣis . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bṛhaspati explained by what acts people, having committed sin, attain to an auspicious end in this world and in heaven, especially recommending gifts of food, citing Rantideva . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bṛhaspati discoursed on the six rs of righteousness, saying that the man who practises the religion of universal compassion achieves the highest good, etc. Vaiśampāyana said Then Bṛhaspati ascended to heaven. . Vaiśampāyana said After this Yudhiṣṭhira, addressing Bhīṣma, said R and brahmans, led by the authority of the Vedas, praise the religion of compassion but how s a man who has injured others in word, thought, and deed, succeed in freeing himself from misery Bhīṣma recommended abstention from meat meat, moreover, enslaves the mind by taste . Yudhiṣṭhira wondered how, when abstention from injury is the highest religion, persons should make offerings of meat in śrāddhas in honour of P. Bhīṣma referred to the innumerable discourses on this topic that had taken place between Ṛ and strongly recommended abstention from honey and meat, referring to the seven Ṛ etc and quoting Manu, etc. he who eats flesh of animals slain by others incurs the sin that attaches to the slaughter he who purchases flesh slays living creatures through his wealth by eating flesh left from sacrifices and of animals that have been slain for feeding brahmans, one incurs a small fault. In old time persons who wanted to attain to regions of merit hereafter, performed sacrifices with seeds. Especially in the month of Kārttika or in its bright fortnight one should abstain from meat, which many ancient kings have e Nābhāga, etc. those who abstain from flesh for months or fortnights continuously, have Brahmaloka reserved to them. Also the kings Śyenacitra, etc did not eat flesh during the month of Kārttika, and, therefore, attained to Brahmaloka, aed by G. and surrounded by, beautiful damsels. The eaters of meat go to Hell he who practises the religion of abstention from meat or teaches it to others will never have to go to Hell, even if he be exceedingly wicked in other respects . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira what can be eaten, etc Bhīṣma discoursed on what is flesh, and continued the preceding discourse, again mentioning Agastya snakes, etc never hurt him who is devoted to compassion those who are covetous of meat are cooked in the hell called Kumbhipāka etymology of the word māṃsa . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira what end those attain to who give up their lives in battle, though to give up life is difficult for men, whether they are in prosperity or adversity, Bhīṣma explained the old narrative of the conversation, in former times, between Vyāsa and a worm Kīṭopākhyāna . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about the relative superiority of knowledge, penances, and gifts, Bhīṣma told the old narrative of the conversation between Maitreya and Vyāsa Maitreya bhikṣā . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about the behaviour of good and chaste women, Bhīṣma said Once Sumanā Kaikeyī in Devaloka asked the omniscient Śāṇḍilī by what course of acts she had attained to heaven . Śāṇḍilī said that it was not by wearing yellow robes or barks of trees, or by shaving her head, or by means of matted hair, that she had attained to this state, but by never saying any disagreeable word to her husband by always worshipping P and brahmans by always obeying her mother in law and father in law, etc. . By adhering to this path of duty a woman is honoured in heaven like a second Arundhatī. Then Śāṇḍilī disappeared . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira which is of superior efficacy, gentleness or gifts, Bhīṣma said that some become gratified by gentleness, others by gifts, and related the ancient narrative of how a brahman, who had been seized in a forest by a Rā was released, after answering the question put to him by the Rā Why am pale of hue and so lean . Rā. worshipped that brahman, and making him his friend and bestowing wealth upon him, let him off . Yudhiṣṭhira asked about the following mysteries how a poor man, desirous of achieving his own good, should act what is the best of all gifts, and what should be given under various circumstances and who are truly deserving of honour and worship. Vaiśampāyana said Thus questioned by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma explained those high mysteries. Bhīṣma said Vyāsa explained them to me in days of yore it is a mystery to the very gods Yama, by vows and yoga, had acquired the knowledge thereof as the fruit of his penances what pleases each god, etc. . The scale of sinfulness in the giver is this chief = courtezans courtezan = drinkers of alcohol drinker = oilmen oilman = butchers a king is reckoned to be half more than these all hence, one should not accept gifts from such. In the śrāddha ritual the mysteries of P and R. have been declared. Once a celestial messenger, sent by the Aśvins, came to the court of Indra, and, remaining invisible, asked Indra why sexual intercourse is interdicted to the man who performs a śrāddha and to him who eats a śrāddha, and to whom each of the three rice balls offered separately at a śrāddha should be sacrificed. . and P. applauded him. P. said Lest the P. of that man should have to lie for a whole month on his vital seed the first rice ball the water the moon the other gods and P. the second should be eaten by the spouse P. confer a son on him who is desirous of a son the third is thrown into the fire P. grant all wishes. The ṛtvij at a śrāddha becomes the P. of the yajamāna, and, therefore, should abstain for that day from sexual intercourse. Ṛ. Vidyutprabha asked what the atonement is for slaying worms, ants, snakes, sheep, deer, birds, etc. Indra answered Thinking of Kurukṣetra, etc. Vidyutprabha recommended another rite, and a mystery discovered by Ṛ which he had heard from Bṛhaspati in the presence of Śiva . Asked by Indra, Bṛhaspati discoursed on the wicked persons who make water facing the sun, etc. . The M and Ṛ as to what gifts at a śrāddha become inexhaustible. P. said By setting free dark coloured bulls, by gifts of sesame seeds and water on the day of new moon, and of lamps in the season of rains, men free themselves from the debt to P. Asked by Vṛddhagārgya, P. said If a blue bull raises water with its tail, P. become gratified by that for, years if the mud from a river bank is attached to its horns, P. go to Somaloka by giving lamps in the season of rain, one shines like the moon those who on the day of new moon make gifts of sesame seeds and water, mixed with honey, using a vessel of uḍumbara, have duly performed a śrāddha with its mysteries, and get cheerful and healthy children . Asked by Indra how he becomes gratified, Viṣṇu said that he hates the destruction of brahmans that he is gratified by the worship of brahmans, with those who worship and make offerings in the circle besmeared with cow dung, those who reverence their own feet those who behold a boar that has just emerged from water and on his head carries a quantity of mud from the bank, or a brahman that is a dwarf in stature, have never to meet with any evil . The man who every day worships the aśvattha and gorocana and the cow is considered to worship the whole universe with As and men staying within such, in my own form, accept the worship that is offered to them the worship of other kind never accept. Baladeva points out the importance of touching a cow, ghee, etc at early dawn. The gods point to the importance of using an uḍumbara vessel in presenting offerings to . and P. Dharma said that the offerings in honour of . and P. should never be given to a brahman who has accepted service under the king, or who rings the bell, etc. from the house of a person from whom a guest returns unsatisfied, P and the sacred fires all return disappointed. Agni declared that P. of one who raises his foot to kick a cow or a brahman or a fire become filled with fear that . become highly dissatisfied, and that he himself has to be roasted in hell for ages fire refuses to accept his libations. Viśvāmitra said He who offers rice boiled in sugared milk to P facing the south, at noon, in the first elephant shade, when in the month of Bhādrapada Maghā takes place in the dark fortnight, has performed a great śrāddha for thirteen years . The cows said that man becomes free from his sins who aes a cow, saying ...in Brahmapura, in days of yore, thou wast present with thy calf at the sacrifice of Indra thou who stoodst in Viṣṇupada and in the path of Agni, all the gods with Nārada call thee Sarvasahā he attains to the regions of Indra, etc. Then the seven Ṛ. circum ambulated Brahmán, and Vasiṣṭha asked how poor righteous men may acquire the merits attaching to sacrifices. Brahmán answered If one, in the bright fortnight of the month of Pauṣa, when Rohiṇī is in conjunction, purifying himself by a bath, lies under the cope of heaven, clad in a single garment, with faith and concentrated attention, and drinks the rays of the moon, one acquires the merits of great sacrifices. This is a high mystery . Vibhāvasu recommended to offer a handful of water and akṣatāḥ with ghee to the moon on the day of the full moon, and warns against cutting a tree or chewing a tooth brush on the day of the new moon, lest the Moon, P and . should be offended. Śrī said that . and P. fly away from that house in which vessels, etc lie scattered, and in which women are beaten. Aṅgiras said that the offspring of that man increases who every night for a full year stands under a karañjaka tree with a lamp and the roots of the Suvarcala plant. Gārgya recommended, for example, that one should always repeat the names of the Puṣkara lakes while the merit of even sacrifices is exhausted, the merit resulting from the performance of the duties that he has mentioned becomes inexhaustible a woman during her season or one whose mother is a leper must not assist at sacred rites, or . will not eat the libations and P. not become gratified for thirteen years at a śrāddha one should also recite the Bhārata. Dhaumya warned against broken utensils, broken bedsteads, and trees in the house when a cock or a is in sight, the gods not eat the offerings made to them. Jamadagni said that a man whose heart is not pure is sure to go to hell, even if he performs a horse sacrifice or Vājapeyas by giving only a prastha of powdered barley with a pure heart to a brahman, a very poor brahman attained to Brahmaloka . Vāyu said that he who, during the four months of the rainy season, offers sesames and water, etc acquires all the merit resulting from sacrifices in which animals are offered up to the gods. When a Śūdra ignites the sacred fires, or women are allowed to assist at rites, one is reborn as a Śūdra, and P. and . are never gratified with him as an expiation, one should for three days pour into the sacred fire libations of the urine of the cow mixed with cow dung, milk, and ghee after a year the gods once more accept the offerings of such a man, and P. become gratified . Lomaśa warned against cohabiting with the wives of other people or a barren woman, and against appropriating what belongs to a brahman, or . and P. will refuse ones offerings, etc. On the lunar day and the day of full moon, one should every month make gifts of ghee and akṣata to brahmans thereby Soma and the Ocean increases, and Indra confers one fourth of the merit of a horse sacrifice, and Soma grants the fruition of ones wishes. He who, during this Kaliyuga, at dawn, in white robes, makes gifts of a vessel of sesame seeds to brahmans, and of water with sesame seeds and honey to P and who gives lamps and kṛśara, acquires, according to the ordinance of Indra, the merit of giving cows and land and of an Agniṣṭoma. This is the ancient ordinance of Ṛ applauded by P. and . in heaven and Pitṛloka . Bhīṣma said Ṛ P and . then asked Arundhatī about the mysteries of dharma . Arundhatī said that dharma should never be communicated to him who is bereft of faith, full of pride, guilty of having slain a brahman, or who violates the bed of his preceptor. She recommended hospitality as better than giving hundreds of thousands of cows in Puṣkara, etc. he who at dawn sprinkles a cows horns with kuśa grass, and causes the water to drip n upon his own head, acquires the merit of bathing in all the tīrthas of the three worlds . . and P. applauded her. Brahmán granted her that her penances would continually increase. Yama related the sayings of Citragupta On days of the full moon and the new moon ones acts are conveyed to the Sun when a mortal goes into Pretaloka, Vibhāvasu bears witness to all his acts especially in Jyeṣṭha Puṣkara one should give a kapilā cow to a learned brahman, on Kaumudī such a man is considered to have given cows with a bull, a gift which is productive of eternal merit. They that are of little understanding become afflicted with hunger and thirst in the regions of the dead, burning in pain, and there is no escape for them, and have to enter into a thick darkness . One should also give a pair of sandals to a deserving brahman, and an umbrella . Sūryas hair stood on end applauding the sayings of Citragupta, he said to . and P. that these five should always be avoided the slayer of a brahman, the slayer of a cow, he who is addicted to sexual intercourse with other peoples wives, he who is bereft of faith, and he who derives his living from the misbehaviour of his wife such persons suffer in hell like worms eating pus and blood, and are avoided by P Snātakas, etc. . Asked by P and Ṛ the Pramathas said that men who are rendered impure by sexual intercourse without having previously purified themselves, men who insult their superiors, who eat different kinds of meat, and sleep at the foot of a tree, he who keeps flesh under his pillow while lying n to sleep, who places the head where his feet should be placed, and who throws phlegm, etc into the water these men deserve to be slain and eaten up by us. Means of protection against them are Gorocanā, vacā, ghee with akṣata, abstaining from meat, ever burning fire, the skin or teeth of a wolf, a hill tortoise, smoke, a cat, a tawny or black goat those articles are destructive of Rā. . Brahmán caused . together with Indra and P. to let the elephant Reṇuka in Rasātala go and question the Diggajas about the mysteries of dharma. Asked by Reṇuka, the Diggajas recommended a śrāddha, with gifts of treacle and rice, on the day of the dark fortnight of Kārttika, under the conjunction of the moon with Āśleṣā, uttering certain mantras, and making bali offerings of blue cloth and fragrant unguents upon an anthill strewn with gajendra flowers at sunset. Thereby those beings in the nether regions that bear the weight of the upper regions become pleased, and the Diggajas not feel the weight of upholding the earth. By observing this rule for a whole year, and fasting, the four castes acquire great merit it is equal to hospitality for years to all the elephants in the three worlds. P and Ṛ. applauded Reṇuka . Śiva recommended to give food to cows every day for a month, contenting oneself with one meal a day he who gives food to cows even for a single receives one fourth of the merit of all his meritorious acts cows uphold the three worlds with As and men Śiva had praised them in the Kṛta age at the solicitation of Brahmán a bull stands in his banner, and he always sports with cows only believers should be instructed in these mysteries . Skanda recommended to smear ones body for three days with earth from the horns of a dark coloured bull and then to perform ones ablutions to offer cooked food with honey, in an uḍumbara vessel, as bali to the moon on the evening of the day of full moon, which offer is accepted by Sā etc and where by Soma and the Ocean increase . Bhīṣma said that these mysteries are even superior to the whole earth, and should not be imparted to any unbeliever, etc. . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma enumerated those persons from which a brahman, a kṣattriya, a vaiśya, and a śūdra may take his food, etc. . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma expounded the expiations which purify a brahman of the sin he incurs by accepting forbidden food without having performed his ablutions, a brahman should not say his evening prayers, etc. for this reason the śrāddha has been ordained to be performed in the afternoon . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira which is better, charity or devotion, Bhīṣma enumerated the pious princes who have attained to heaven . These and many other men have attained to heaven by charity and penances, and return again and again. As night approaches, shall explain to thee in the morning whatever bts may arise in thy mind . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discoursed on the five kinds of gifts from desire of merit, from desire of profit, from fear, from free choice, and from pity Brahmán has said that one should always make gifts according to ones power . Yudhi ṣṭhira, complaining of the distress of the time, asked Bhīṣma to discourse on religion and profit in the presence of Kṛṣṇa and all the kings. Vaiśampāyana said that Bhīṣma recited the discourses on the puissance of Viṣṇu in days of yore . Once Kṛṣṇa observed a vow for twelve years in order to obtain a son Nārada, etc came there with Si etc. fire issued from the mouth of Kṛṣṇa and consumed the summit of the mountain with all its living creatures, then it came back and touched his feet he cast a benignant look upon the mountain, which once more became aned and peopled as before. Asked by Ṛ Kṛṣṇa explained that, in consequence of his penances, his soul became transformed into fire and repaired to Brahmán, and then went back now ask you to tell me something that is highly wonderful, which you have heard of or seen on earth or in heaven. Ṛ. glorified Kṛṣṇa, and asked by them, Nārada described the wonderful incident on Himavat, which was witnessed by Ṛ. on their tīrthayātrā . Bhīṣma said Then Ṛ. Nārada, the friend of Kṛṣṇa, told the following story of the discourse between Śiva and Umā Umā Maheśvara saṃvāda . Bhīṣma said Kṛṣṇa paid honour to R who praised Kṛṣṇa, approving of what Śiva had said of him, and saying that they had told him, only to please him, since he had asked them but there is nothing in the three worlds that is unknown to thee. Ṛ. took leave of Kṛṣṇa, promising him that he would soon get an excellent son. Kṛṣṇa returned to Dvārakā. Rukmiṇī, after the tenth month, bore a son who is identified with Kāma, which exists in every creature and moves within the hearts of both gods and Asuras. Praise of Kṛṣṇa = Viṣṇu Trivikrama = the thirty three gods with Indra = Adideva, etc. Bhīṣma congratulated the Pāṇḍavas, especially Arjuna, and pitied Duryodhana many Dai. and Dā. have been slain by Kṛṣṇa, witness Śivas utterances on Himavat to Ṛ. the greatness, etc of Arjuna can only come up to one third of that of Kṛṣṇa Bhīṣma consoled Yudhiṣṭhira, citing Vyāsa and Nārada. Nārada and Vyāsa have told me that Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna practised penances in Badarī for, years he mentioned his slaying of Kaṃsa the destruction of the Kurus is due to Duryodhana, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira remained silent the kings with Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and Ṛ. with Nārada, applauded Bhīṣma and worshipped Kṛṣṇa. When Bhīṣma had rested and become refreshed, Yudhiṣṭhira once more asked him . Vaiśampāyana said Yudhiṣṭhira asked Bhīṣma who is the one god, which the foremost of all religions, and by what prayer s one become freed from the bonds of birth and transmigration . Bhīṣma answered Always uttering the, names of the eternal Viṣṇu Puruṣottama, the great Brahmán, etc which were sung by the Ṛ. . Then he enumerated Viṣṇus, names. The moveable and immoveable world with As G Y U and Rā is under the away of Kṛṣṇa R P etc have sprung from Nārāyaṇa the Yoga, the Sāṅkhya, the crafts, the Vedas, the Śāstras, etc have sprung from Janārdana one should recite this hymn in praise of Viṣṇu, composed by Vyāsa . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about the which gives righteousness and success on setting out on a journey, or on entering, or at the commencement of any undertaking, or in sacrifices to . and P etc Bhīṣma recited a mantra promulgated by Vyāsa and ordained by Sāvitrī, and which purifies from all sins, and which was recited in days of yore by the foremost Ṛ. Salutations to Vasiṣṭha, etc. the eleven Rudras are Ajaikapād, etc. in Śatarudra they are Aṃśa, etc are the twelve Ādityas, the sons of Kaśyapa according to the Śruti Dhara, etc are the eight Vasus Nāsatya and Dasra are the two Aśvins, the sons of Mārttaṇḍa, who came out of the nose of Sañjñā Mṛtyu, Kāla, . P Mu and Si. are the invisible witnesses of all the good and bad acts of all beings, giving the regions of felicity created by Prajāpati to those that praise them, and residing in all the worlds by praising these gods Nandīśvara, etc one is cleansed of all sins the Ṛ. Mānavas are Yava krīta, etc. blazing like Rudra, Anala, and the Vasus, they rejoice in heaven with the gods after having performed good deeds on earth the seven gurus of Indra live in the East, and by praising them one enjoys felicity in Indraloka Unmuou, etc are the seven ṛtvijs of Dharmarāja, and live in the South Dṛḍheyu, etc are the ṛtvijs of Varuṇa, and dwell in the West Atri, etc are the seven gurus of Kubera, and dwell in the North there are seven other Mu. in all the quarters, bestowers of fame, etc. Dharma, etc are upholders of the earth Rāma, Vyāsa, Droṇas son Aśvatthāman, and Lomaśa these are the celestial munis, distributed into seven groups seven they are the creators of peace and good and the regents of the quarters one should turn his face in that direction in which one of these Ṛ. live, and take refuge with him they are the creators of all creatures and the purifiers of the worlds Saṃvartta, etc have practised severe penances and are celebrated over the three worlds there are others resembling Rudra, in Brahmaloka, through whom the sonless obtains a son, and the poor obtains wealth one should also praise Pṛthu, etc Sāṅkhya and Yoga, Havya and Kavya, and Supreme Bráhman one should praise them morning and evening then there is no fear from fire or thieves, nor from Pś. and Rā etc. P. eat that mans kavya, and the gods his havya, who recites at his rites for . and P. they contribute to the peace of all the four castes when setting out on a journey, etc on every occasion one should recite them it is a great mystery of Ṛ etc. This ancient tale contains the opinion of the accomplished Parāśara, and in former days was recited to Indra the veritable eternal Bráhman, the heart of all creatures and the eternal śruti all of the race of Sūrya and of Soma, i.e. the Rāghavas and the Kurus, always recite it after having purified themselves there is rescue from every calamity in always reciting seven Ṛ and Dhruva the old B. ṛ. Kāśyapa, etc have worshipped them the opinion of Bhāradvāja they were obtained by the sons of Ṛcīka having acquired them again from Vasiṣṭha, Śakra and the Vasus vanquished all Dā. the man who makes a present of cows with their horns covered with gold to a learned brahman, and he who causes the excellent Bhārata story to be always recited, these two acquire merit the benefits obtained by praising Bhṛgu, etc. . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira what course of conduct towards the various classes of persons is regarded faultless, Bhīṣma eulogised the brahmans, who are attentive to P and guests who eat the first portions of havya and kavya who by their very eating rescue the three worlds from great fear whose wealth consists in all the śikṣās and the śruti whose wrath yet burns in the Daṇḍaka wood, etc. . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira what is the reward attached to the worship of brahmans, Bhīṣma told the old narrative of a conversation between Pavana and Arjuna Pavanārjuna saṃvāda . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about the prosperity resulting from the worship of the brahmans, Bhīṣma, saying that the time of his death is not distant, and that he has recited all the duties mentioned in the Purāṇas, referred him to Kṛṣṇa . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira what prosperity results from the worship of the brahmans, Kṛṣṇa related what he in former times in Dvāravatī had answered his son Pradyumna, who was greatly excited by brahmans and put this same question to him they have Soma for their king. He related the visit of Durvāsas . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about the knowledge he had acquired from Durvāsas, Kṛṣṇa said that he would recite that Śatarudrīya which he repeats every morning, and which was composed by Prajāpati at the end of his penances. Then he praised Śiva . Vaiśampāyana said After Kṛṣṇa had said these words, Yudhiṣṭhira once more asked Bhīṣma which of the two, perception or the scriptures, should be authoritative for arriving at a conclusion . Bhīṣma answered that to affirm that perception is the only authority
Anūdara, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Anudātta, a Fire .
Anudyūta .
Anudyūtaparvan. When the Pāṇḍavas had left Hāstinapura with all their wealth and jewels, Duḥśāsana complained of it to Duryodhana, who, with Karṇa and Śakuni, quoting the words of Bṛhaspati when counselling Indra about politics, and declaring that the Pāṇḍavas would certainly revenge themselves, prevailed upon Dhṛtarāṣṭra to invite them a second time to a match of gambling between Yudhiṣṭhira and Śakuni, on the condition that the defeated party should repair to the woods for twelve years, dressed in deer skins, and spend the thirteenth year in some inhabited country unrecognized, and if recognized, be exiled for another twelve years. If the Pāṇḍavas should succeed in observing this vow for thirteen years, the Dhārtarāṣṭras would in the meantime have made alliances and have assembled an invincible army, so that they could defeat them if they reappeared. Droṇa, Somadatta, Bāhlīka, Gautama, Vidura, Aśvatthāman, Vaiśyāputra, Bhūriśravas, Bhīṣma, and Vikarṇa dissuaded in vain . Gāndhārī reminded Dhṛtarāṣṭra of the counsel Vidura had given, when Duryo dhana was born, to kill him, and recommended him to it now, and not to let the gambling match take place, saying that it would cause the destruction of the whole race of the Kurus. But Dhṛtarāṣṭra could not act contrary to the will of his sons . The royal messengers overtook Yudhiṣṭhira when he had already gone a long way. Yudhiṣṭhira having said, Although a golden animal was an impossibility, Rāma suffered himself to be tempted by a golden deer, they returned. The gambling began on the above mentioned conditions, and Yudhiṣṭhira lost . The Pāṇḍavas, casting off their royal robes, attired themselves in deer skins. Duḥśāsana exulted, and exhorted Kṛṣṇā to aban the fallen Pāṇḍavas and choose a husband among the Kurus. As Bhīma rebuked him and threatened to slay him with his followers, Duḥśāsana, dancing around, said, O cow O cow Bhīṣma again swore to drink his blood and to kill all the Dhārtarāṣṭras. As the Pāṇḍavas were going away, Duryodhana mimicked the tread of Bhīma, who then said will slay Duryodhana with my mace, and place my foot on his head. Dhanañjaya will slay Karṇa, and Sahadeva will slay Śakuni, and will drink the blood of Duḥśāsana. Arjuna and Sahadeva approved of it. Nakula, the handsomest of men, vowed to kill all the Dhārtarāṣṭras that had insulted Draupadī . Yudhiṣṭhira bids farewell to Bhīṣma, Somadatta, Bāhlīka, Droṇa, Kṛpa, Aśvatthāman, Vidura, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the Dhārtarāṣṭras Yuyutsu, Sañjaya, etc. Vidura kept Pṛthā in his abode, and consoled Yudhiṣṭhira Formerly thou wast instructed on the Himavat by Meru Sāvarṇi, in Vāraṇāvata by Dvaipāyana, on Bhṛgutuṅga by Rāma, on the Dṛṣadvatī by Śambhu, near Añjana by the great ṛṣi Asita, by Bhṛgu on the banks of Kalmāṣī Nārada always beholds thee, and this Dhaumya is thy purohita, resolve to win victory like Indra, to control thy wrath like Yama, to give in charity like Kuvera, to control all passions like Varuṇa. So Yudhiṣṭhira went away, bowing to Bhīṣma and Droṇa, . When Kṛṣṇā took leave of Kuntī, Kuntī broke out in complaints, and especially recommended her ever to keep her eye on Sahadeva. When Kuntī beheld her sons clad in deer skins, surrounded by rejoicing foes, she embraced them and broke out in com plaints, asking why Kṛṣṇa, who dwells in Dvārakā, and is without beginning and without end, s not deliver them from such woe. O Sahadeva cease to go thou art my dearest child, O son of Mādrī The Pāṇḍavas, having consoled her, set out for the woods, and Vidura led her to his house. The ladies of Dhṛtarāṣṭras house wept, blaming the Kauravas and Dhṛtarāṣṭra, anxious, sent for Vidura . Questioned by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Vidura described the attitude of the Pāṇḍavas, etc when going away . The citizens cried out in grief, blaming the Kurus. Flashings of lightning and other terrible omens appeared. Nārada appeared, surrounded by great ṛṣis, and foreboded that on the fourteenth year thence the Kauravas would all be destroyed by Bhīma and Arjuna. Then he disappeared through the skies. Duryodhana, Karṇa, and Śakuni offered the king to Droṇa, who said that the Pāṇḍavas were incapable of being slain that they would practise the brahmacarya for twelve years, and then return in anger that he would protect the Dhārtarāṣṭras, who had sought his pro tection, to the best of his ability but that he would himself be slain by Dhṛṣṭadyumna, whom Drupada had obtained from the fire by the ascetic power of Yāja and Upayāja it is widely known in the world that Dhṛṣṭadyumna will slay Droṇa. Dhṛtarāṣṭra sent Vidura to bring the Pāṇḍavas back, or, if they did not come back, to send them off with respect, with their weapons, cars, and infantry, etc. . Sañjaya spoke to Dhṛtarāṣṭra about the perversity of his policy. Dhṛtarāṣṭra related that when Kṛṣṇā was dragged into the court the grief was so great that the enraged brahmans did not that evening perform their agnihotra he also related the omens which had appeared on the occasion, etc. .
Anugītā .
the of the minor parvans of Mhbhr. Anugītāi.e. Bhagavadgītāsiddhaṃkramamāṇaṃcakradharaiḥ, PCR prakṛtiṃ, ArjunaPage0 b nityayuktasya, Brāhmaṇagītāb, g, his maternal uncle his maternal aunt, omensb, description the trees looked like the kalpa trees of Indras garden the mountain looked like Meru, Page0 a, i.e. Rohiṇī, Nīl.i.e. Sunday, Nīl descriptioni.e. Dhaumya, Nīl descriptionwith kṛśaras, and meat, and nivāpas mixed with sesame seeds descriptionfour miles, PCR description with articles destructive of Rā tena satyena, Page0 b etymologydescription, with the permission of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, description, the sons and grandsons of the slain, description, jepuḥ, Page0 a the son of Jayadrathaorphanorphan, step description of his car, touching water, approved by Gaṅgāwhile he was engaged with Śikhaṇḍin and had ceased to fightdvijātipariveśakaḥPage0 b, B. Kolla, description, having heard it from a confidential agent of his in Dvārakā, description Page0 a, and Ulūpī description, B. cookingheart, tongue, breast, etc Nīl. cāturhotrapramāṇataḥ PCR. according to what is e in the cāturhotra sacrificethe price of the earth description, b, truePage0 b, ev. Nakulākhyāna
Anugoptṛ, a Viśvadeva .
Aṇuha .
Anuhlāda, son of Hiraṇyakaśipu . Daitya.
Anukampaka. b, . Bhīṣma said In the Kṛta age king Anukampaka had been brought under the sway of his foes in battle, and his son Hari, who was like Nārāyaṇa himself, had been slain in that battle with all his followers and troops. The king devoted himself to a life of tranquillity. Nārada told him Mṛtyuprajāpatisaṃvāda . .
Anukārin = Śiva .
Anukarman, a Viśvadeva .
Anukramaṇī, the first chapter of Mahābhārata, perhaps also the second, . Compare Anu kramaṇikādhyāya Parvānukramaṇī.
Anukramaṇikādhyāya, Anukramaṇī, .
the first of the minor parvans . The Sūta Ugraśravas, son of Lomaharṣaṇa, had heard the Mahābhārata, which had been composed by Vyāsa, recited under the direction of Dvai pāyana himself by Vaiśampāyana, disciple of Vyāsa, at the serpent sacrifice of king Janamejaya, son of Parikṣit he had thereupon undertaken a pilgrimage to the tīrthas and visited Samantapañcaka thence he came to the twelve years sattra of Śaunaka in the Naimiṣa forest, where he related the Mahābhārata, beginning with the aation of Viṣṇu identified with the Absolute, and a brief exposition of the creation and succession of beings from the Absolute through Brahmán, the Prajāpatis, gods, etc n to the families of the Kurus, etc mentioned in the poem. The Mahābhārata contains an enlarged and an abridged form some make it begin with Manu, some with Āstīka, and some with Uparicara . Vyāsa had composed the Mahābhārata in a moment, and, at the counsel of Brahmán, had Gaṇeśa to write it n as fast as he dictated to him. The portion destined for men he taught Vaiśampāyana, who narrated it in the intervals between the parts of the serpent sacrifice of Janamejaya, first giving a survey of the principal contents, partly in the form of a conversation between Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Sañjaya. Sañjaya, in order to console Dhṛtarāṣṭra, first enumerated great kings, who were formerly mentioned by Nārada to Śaivya when lamenting the loss of a son, and thereupon others, who had all died. He, who hears or reads the Mahābhārata, is purified from the most atrocious sins .
Anukūla = Viṣṇu .
Anumati. u, .
Anūpā .
Anūpadeśa . f, .
Anūpapati = Arjuna Kārta vīrya, .
Anūparāja .
Anupāvṛtta .
Anurādhā, a nakṣatra .
Anuruddha .
Anurūpa = Kṛṣṇa.
Anuṣṇā .
Anuṣṭubh = Viṣṇu .
Anuttama = Viṣṇu .
Anuvākāḥ = Kṛṣṇa.
Anuvinda1 . Anuvinda3.
Anuvinda2, a Kaikeya prince .
Anuvinda3, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Anuyāyin, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Anvagbhānu .
Anyagocarā, a Mātṛ. u, .
Āpa, a Fire .
Āpaddharma i.e. Āpaddharmaparvan.
. Yudhiṣṭhira enquired of Bhīṣma what should be e by a weak and timid king, as also by one that is in great distress. Bhīṣmas answer recommending peace and even the surrender of territory. The king should never surrender his person as long as he can avoid ng so. If the invading enemy be righteous, the assailed king should make peace if otherwise, the assailed should fight bravely and fall . How a brahman should subsist in times of calamity. Bhīṣma began his exposition of the moral standard of unlucky times in times of calamity the king may take from the wicked and give it to the good at such times censurable acts not become censurable the king should never oppress brahmans, even at such times. Slander should be avoided. The tests of righteousness difficulty in finding the course of duty. Some regard ancient usage as the highest test of righteousness they that are in favour of the conduct of Caṅkha towards Likhita not hold this opinion . How a king should fill his treasury. The king should establish laws which he should never transgress . The two duties of a kṣattriya are the acquisition of religious merit and of wealth. The advantages of Power . The old story of a robber who having in this world been observant of restraint did not meet with destruction in the next Kāyavya carita . What wealth should not be taken by the king . Who enjoy happiness Śākulopākhyāna . . How a king should behave who is weak and threatened on all sides by powerful foes the old story of the mouse, the cat, the owl, the mongoose, and the hunter, i.e. Mārjāra mūṣika saṃvāda . The moral of the story . Bhīṣma related the conversation between the bird Pūjanī and king Brahmadatta, i.e. Brahmadatta Pūjanī saṃvāda . How a king should behave when there is a general decadence of righteousness the old story of the discourse between Bhāradvāja and king Śatruñjaya, i.e. Kaṇikopadeśa . How a brahman should live when there is terrible distress around. Bhīṣma said that the Kṛta, etc are all dependent on the kings conduct, citing the old story of the discourse between Viśvāmitra and the Cāṇḍāla in a hamlet inhabited by Cāṇḍālas. Towards the end of Tretā and the beginning of Dvāpara a frightful drought occurred extending over twelve years the planet Bṛhaspati began to move in a retrograde course, and Soma receded towards the south, etc. the brahmans abstained from sacrifices and recitations of the Vedas, and no longer uttered vaṣaṭs, etc. the very Ṛṣis, giving up their vows, began to wander hither and thither. M. ṛ. Viśvāmitra, leaving his wife and son, wandered fireless and homeless, and regardless of food, clean and unclean. One day he came upon a hamlet, in the midst of a forest, inhabited by cruel hunters, etc. . Viśvāmitra, in rage of hunger, wanted to steal a s haunch . He was discovered and harshly addressed by the owner but when the Cāṇḍāla learned who he was he addressed him respectfully, and dissuaded him from eating s meat, as the is less clean than a jackal, and the haunch of a is much worse than other parts of his body only the five kinds of five clawed animals are clean food for brahmans and kṣattriyas and vaiśyas, as laid n in the scriptures . Viśvāmitra said that it is the duty of the brahmans to behave like Agni, that the Vedas are fire, and that fire at times becomes a consumer of everything life is better than death if living one may acquire virtue he mentioned that Agastya, when hungry, ate up the Asura Vātāpi . Notwithstanding the warnings of the Cāṇḍāla, Viśvamitra took away that haunch of s meat into the woods and wished to eat it with his wife, having gratified the gods and the Pitṛs igniting a fire according to the Brāhma rites and cooking a caru according to the Aindrāgneya rites, dividing the caru into due portions, he invoked the gods, including Indra. Meanwhile Indra began to pour rain copiously. Viśvāmitra, having completed the rites, himself ate that meat. Afterwards he destroyed all his sins by his penances and acquired the most wonderful success . Yudhiṣṭhira was distressed at the possibility of such acts of impiety being mentioned as a duty. Bhīṣma said that kings should gather wis from various sources, and not from the Vedas alone. Those who blame the injunctions of the scriptures, etc are hucksters in learning and Rākṣasas among men it has been heard by us that the texts of morality cannot be understood solely by discussion or by ones own intellect Indra has said that this is the opinion of Bṛhaspati... in days of old Uśanas told the Daiteyas this truth, that scriptures are no scriptures if they cannot stand the test of reason...the sin of killing a person is equal to the sin of not killing one that deserves to be killed. Indra has said that in times of distress the great duty of a king is chastising the wicked and protecting the good . Yudhiṣṭhira enquired after the merits of protecting suppliants. Bhīṣma, reminded of Śibi, etc told the story that Bhārgava had recited to king Mucukunda, how a pigeon won success, i.e. Kapota lubdhaka saṃvāda . Requested by Yudhiṣṭhira about how a person can be purified after having committed sin from want of judgment, Bhīṣma related the old tale, applauded by Ṛ of what the brahman Indrota Śaunaka said to Janamejaya, i.e. Indrota Pārīkṣitīya . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira if he had ever seen or heard of any mortal restored to life after having succumbed to death, Bhīṣma related the story of the discourse between a vulture and a jackal as it had happened of old in the forest of Naimiṣa, i.e. Gṛdhra gomāyu saṃvāda . Yudhiṣṭhira asked Bhīṣma as to how a weak king who incurs the wrath of a powerful one should behave in the hour of danger. Bhīṣma told the story of the discourse between Pavana and the śālmali, who, having dared the Wind god, saved himself by causing his branches to be lopped off Pavana śālmali saṃvāda . One should over look the wrongs inflicted by a person of superior strength, and even consider them like the acts of a child, an idiot, or one that is blind or deaf. The eighteen akṣauhiṇīs were not equal in might to Arjuna . Covetousness is the cause of sin it is not known in its real nature by G As M. U etc. . Discourse on ignorance it has its origin in covetousness Janaka, etc acquired heaven in consequence of their having repressed covetousness . The moral laws laid n by M. ṛ. are many the highest among them all is self restraint it surpasses charity and sacrifice and study of the Vedas . Penance is the root of everything by penance Prajāpati created the universe, etc and Ṛ. acquired the Vedas and acquired their sixfold divine attributes renunciation constitutes the highest penance . Discourse on Truth and its indications it is applauded by brahmans, Ṛ and P. it is yoga, it is Brahmán, sacrifice, etc. it has been found to weigh heavier than, horse sacrifices . Discourse on the thirteen vices that are powerful foes of all all these thirteen faults stained the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . The characteristics of malevolent persons . How brahmans should be provided for. At the end of every year one should perform the Vaiśvānara sacrifice . The practice of an act laid n in an alternative is not destructive of virtue fearing death, . Sā the brahmans, and M. ṛ. make use of the alternative instead of the principal rule in seasons of distress. The five kinds of falsehood that are not sinful. The three sins that cannot be expiated. Acts that are never sinful . Different kinds of expiation for different kinds of sin . Questioned by Nakula, Bhīṣma related Khaḍgotpattikathana . When Bhīṣma became silent Yudhi ṣṭhira returned home. Yudhiṣṭhiras question to Vidura and his own brothers about the three things . Vidura assigned precedence to virtue. Arjuna assigned precedence to wealth . Nakula and Sahadeva assigned the precedence to both wealth and virtue. Bhīmasena assigns precedence to desire . Yudhiṣṭhira applauded withdrawal from the three things, recommending emancipation or extinction, and quoted Brahmán. All of them were filled with delight and applauded Yudhiṣṭhira, who once more addressed Bhīṣma . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira with whom friendship is delightful, Bhīṣma, having also stated with whom friendship should be avoided, related an old story that had occurred in the country of the Mlecchas, that lies to the north, about an ungrateful person, i.e. Kṛtaghnopākhyāna . Bhīṣmas observations on ingratitude .
Āpagā, a river .
Āpagā, a river in the country of the Madras .
Āpagāsuta = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Āpageya = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Āpaḥ .
Apakṣakṣayaṃkara = Śiva .
Apāṃ garbha, v. Agni.
Apāṃ hrada, a tīrtha .
Apāṃ nidhi = Viṣṇu .
Apāṃ pati = Varuṇa .
Apāṃ prapatana, a tīrtha .
Apāna1 . e, Apāna, having recourse to the heat that is in the urethra and the abinal intestines, moves, engaged in carrying out urine and fæces .
Apāna2 = Śiva .
Apāntaratama, son of Sarasvatī .
Apara = Śiva .
Aparājita1, a serpent .
Aparājita2, a king, incarnation of the second of the Kāleyas .
Aparājita3, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭras .
Aparājita4 = Mahāpuruṣa, Viṣṇu .
Aparājitā, .
Aparanandā, a river .
Aparānta, a people in Bhāratavarṣa .
Aparaseka, pl a people conquered by Sahadeva on his Digvijaya .
Aparimita, Aparinirmita, Aparinindita Mahā puruṣastave.
Āpastamba, a brahman .
Āpava = Vasiṣṭha . b, .
Apavarga, .
Āpavopākhyāna . Gaṅgā fully related to Śāntanu the reason why the Brahmarṣi Vasiṣṭha, the son of Varuṇa, had cursed the Vasus. When the Vasus, Pṛthu, etc were wandering with their wives in the wood near Vasiṣṭhas hermitage, frequented by the devarṣis, Dyaus was prevailed upon by his wife, in the interest of her friend Jitavatī, daughter of Uśīnara, to steal Vasiṣṭhas homadhenu, by drinking whose milk one could remain in unchanged youth for, years. Vasiṣṭha, however, was prevailed upon to let among them Dyaus alone dwell on earth for a long time without marrying. Then Gaṅgā, taking with her the child, went away, and Śāntanu returned to his capital shall now recount the virtues of the Bhārata Śāntanu, whose splendid story is called the Mahābhārata .
Āpoda, v. Āyoda.
Apramada = Śiva .
Apramatta = Viṣṇu .
Aprameya = Viṣṇu, Skanda.
Aprameyātman = Viṣṇu .
Apratarkya Mahāpuruṣastave.
Apratiraṭha = Viṣṇu .
Apratirūpa = Śiva .
Aprekṣya = Kṛṣṇa, .
Apsaras1, mostly pl. . f, . c, i, u, ee, gg, . c, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . c, b, . d, . b, . j, . b, . g, . b, . e, .
Apsaras2, special Apsarases, etc. f, . aa, . c, .
Apsarogaṇasevita = Śiva .
Apsuhomya, a ṛṣi .
Apsujātā, a mātṛ. u, .
Āpta, a serpent .
Apūraṇa .
Āraṇeya = Śuka .
Āraṇeya, in the enumerations of the parvans of Mhbhr = Āraṇeyaparvan.
. Asked by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related what the Pāṇḍavas did after having rescued Kṛṣṇā . The Pāṇḍavas left Kāmyaka and returned to Dvaitavana with Kṛṣṇā. Once a deer carried off a brahmans araṇī and mantha, was pursued by the Pāṇḍavas, and suddenly became invisible. Bhīma repented that he had not slain the prātikāmin, Arjuna that he had not slain Karṇa, and Sahadeva that he had not slain Śakuni. Nakula, Sahadeva, Arjuna, and Bhīma were suc cessively sent to fetch water, but caused to drop n dead by a Yakṣa. At last Yudhiṣṭhira himself went, answered thirty four questions put by the Yakṣa, chose that Nakula should be revived, rescued all his brothers, learnt that the Yakṣa was his father Dharma, was granted the boon that the brahman would recover his araṇī and mantha, that the Pāṇḍavas would manage to live the thirteenth year un recognized in Virāṭas king, and that Yudhiṣṭhira should overcome covetousness, etc. The Pāṇḍavas asked permission of the brahmans to live the thirteenth year in concealment from the Dhārtarāṣṭras, Duryodhana, etc and Karṇa and Saubala. Dhaumya, etc consoled Yudhiṣṭhira Even the gods have wandered in disguise for the purpose of overcoming foes. The brahmans went back to their homes, and the Pāṇḍavas and Dhaumya set out with Kṛṣṇā, and the next day proceeded for a krośa, and then sat n in order to take counsel of each other.
Arāṇi, a son of Viśvāmitra .
Araṇīparvan = Āraṇeyaparvan .
Araṇīsuta = Śuka .
Arantuka, a dvārapāla . kk, . the reading of B .
Āraṇyaśāstra, plur. .
Āraṇyaka1, the Āraṇyaka or Āraṇyakas, considered as appendices to the Vedas and as containing the rules for the forest mode of life often called śāstra . c, . b, .
Āraṇyaka2 = Āraṇyakaparvan . c, .
Āraṇyakaparvan . The Pāṇḍavas set out from Hāstinapura through the Vardhamāna gate with their weapons, accompanied by Kṛṣṇā, in a northerly direction. Indrasena and other servants, in number, with their wives, followed them on swift cars. The citizens wished to leave the town and follow them, but were prevailed upon by Yudhiṣṭhira to return and cherish Bhīṣma, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Vidura, Kuntī, etc. About the close of the day the Pāṇḍavas reached the banian Pramāṇa on the banks of the Gaṅgā, purified them selves by touching the water, and passed the night there, taking water alone as their sole sustenance, in the company of brahmans with and without fire, who had followed them . When the day broke in, Yudhiṣṭhira tried to prevail upon the brahmans to leave him, in order that they might not undergo sufferings, living on fruits, roots, and deer. But they declared that they would follow him, themselves providing their own food. Then a learned brahman, Śaunaka, versed in Sāṅkhya and Yoga, quoting the ślokas of Janaka, told Yudhiṣṭhira not only to retire from the world, but also in his heart not to mind the loss of his wealth. Yudhiṣṭhira declared that it was not from avarice, but only because he could no more support the brahmans, that he regretted his wealth nobody should cook his food for himself alone, and nobody should slay an animal without devoting it to the gods, the pitṛs, and guests, nor should one eat of that food which had not been duly dedicated to the gods and the pitṛs. Śaunaka said that sacrifices, study, gifts, and penance pave the way to the world of the Pitṛs truth, forgiveness, subduing the senses, and renunciation of desire to the heaven of the gods, and they should be practised without reference to self . It was by their wealth of yoga that the Rudras, Sādhyas, Ādityas, Vasus, and Aśvins rule over the creatures. So Yudhiṣṭhira, who had already achieved success as to his indebtedness towards his ancestors and as to sacrifices, now ought to seek success in yoga and in ascetic austerities then he would be able to realize all his wishes . Yudhiṣṭhira then, having consulted Dhaumya, was taught by him names of Sūrya, proclaimed by Svayambhū . Yudhiṣṭhira, touching the water of Gaṅgā, with his senses under control, and feeding upon air alone, stood engaged in prāṇāyāma, and began a hymn in praise of Sūrya . The Sun then showed himself to Yudhiṣṭhira and gave him a copper vessel, saying that if Pāñcālī kept this vessel fruits, roots, meat, and vegetables, cooked in their kitchen, would be inexhaustible for twelve years. Then the god vanished. Rising from the water, Yudhiṣṭhira took hold of Dhaumyas feet and embraced his brothers. The clean food that was dressed, however little, became inexhaustible, and only after the brahmans, the brothers, Yudhiṣṭhira, and at last Kṛṣṇā had eaten the days food became exhausted. Having then performed sacrifices, they set out for the Kāmyaka wood, accompanied by Dhaumya and the brahmans . Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Vidura what they should to secure the good will of the citizens. Vidura said that he must give back to the Pāṇḍavas all that had been theirs, let Duryodhana, Śakuni, and Karṇa wait upon them, and Duḥśāsana ask their forgiveness in open court, and if Duryodhana would not consent to reign in peace jointly with Yudhiṣṭhira, he ought to aban him and let Yudhiṣṭhira reign alone. Dhṛtarāṣṭra did not approve, and saying stay or go, as thou listest, he suddenly rose and went away, and Vidura went away to the Pāṇḍavas . Starting from the Gaṅgā, the Pāṇḍavas went to Kurukṣetra, performed ablutions in the Sarasvatī, Dṛśadvatī, and Yamunā, and, travelling in a westerly direction, they arrived at the Kāmyaka wood on the Sarasvatī. There Vidura came to them in a single car. When seeing him, Yudhiṣṭhira was afraid that he brought an invitation to a new match at dice with Śakuni about their weapons. Vidura told them that he had been forsaken by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and gave them advice how to secure adherents . After Vidura had gone Dhṛtarāṣṭra repented and fell n senseless, and having regained consciousness caused Sañjaya to bring Vidura back . Duryodhana, being afraid because Vidura had returned, held counsel with Śakuni, Karṇa, and Duḥśāsana, who were of opinion that the Pāṇḍavas would remain the promised space of time in the wood. As Duryodhana, however, was not contented, Karṇa proposed to set out and slay them. When they had gone out Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana came upon them and commanded them to desist, and then appeared before Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Vyāsa warned Dhṛtarāṣṭra against permitting Duryodhana to try to slay the Pāṇḍavas . As Dhṛtarāṣṭra said he was unable to cast off his senseless son, Vyāsa told him One when Indra saw Surabhi weeping in heaven, and asked her why she wept, she told him that one of her offspring was exceedingly harassed by a husbandman and although she had, offspring, and her affections flowed equally towards all, yet she felt greater compassion for the weak. Indra poured n a shower of rain and caused obstruction to the husbandmans work. So feel anxious regarding the Pāṇḍavas in distress let thy affections be greater towards the weak, and let Duryodhana make peace with them . Maitreya śāpa .
Āraṭṭa, a people . b, .
Araudra = Viṣṇu .
Aravindākṣa = Sūrya, Viṣṇu .
Arbuda1, a Serpent .
Arbuda2, a tīrtha .
Arcayanty arkam arkiṇaḥ = Śiva .
Ārcīkaparvata, a holy place. b, The place of the Maruts, with the caityas of the gods, the tīrtha of the Moon, inhabited by Vaikhānasas, Vālikhilyas, Pāvakas, living upon air where Śāntanu and Śunaka, Nara and Nārāyaṇa have attained eternity where gods, Pitṛs, and great Ṛṣis have practised austerities.
Arcismantaḥ, one of the three classes of Pitṛs .
Arcismat = Viṣṇu .
Arcismatī, a daughter of Aṅgiras .
Arcita = Viṣṇu .
Ārśyaśṛṅgi, v. Ārṣyaśṛṅgi.
Ardana = Śiva .
Ardhacandravyūha, a certain array see vyūha.
Ardhakīla, a tirtha .
Ardhamāsa1 = Skanda.
Ardhamāsa2, pl the half months, person. u, .
Ārdrā, a nakṣatra .
Ārdracarmāmbaravṛta = Śiva .
Arghābhiharaṇa .
. On the abhiṣecanīya day maharṣis and Nārāda entered the antarvedi and sat n together with the rājarṣis engaged in various topics of conversation and dispute. No śūdra was then near the antarvedi, nor anybody without vows . Nārada sat there with feelings of awe, remembering the words he had heard of old in the mansion of Brahmán regarding the incarnation of the deities, and knowing that Kṛṣṇa was the incarnation of Nārāyaṇa and would himself destroy all these assembled kṣattriyas. Bhīṣma then proposed to Yudhiṣṭhira that arghas should be offered to the kings, and first to him who was the foremost. As Bhīṣma declared Kṛṣṇa to be foremost, he caused Sahadeva to present the first argha to Kṛṣṇa, which filled the Cedi king Śiśupāla with envy . Śiśupāla gravely censures Bhīṣma, Yudhiṣṭhira, and Kṛṣṇa, and accompanied by the kings left the assembly . Yudhiṣṭhira ran after Śiśupāla and spoke sweetly to him in order to conciliate him Bhīṣma maintained the fitness of giving Kṛṣṇa the first argha . Sāhadeva and Nārada declared it to be highly improper not to worship Kṛṣṇa. Sunītha stirred the kings up in order to obstruct the completion of the sacrifice .
Arghasaṃvāda = Arghāharaṇaparvan .
Arha1 = Viṣṇu .
Arha2, a people .
Ariha1, son of Avācīna .
Ariha2, son of Devātithi .
Ariha3, seems to be a son of Dhrtarāṣṭras .
Arimejaya, a Vṛṣṇi .
Ariṣṭā .
Ariṣṭanemi1, a ṛṣi, sometimes identified with Tārkṣya and sometimes named together with him .
Ariṣṭanemi2 .
Ariṣṭasena .
Arivindavaktra = Skanda.
Ārjava .
Arjuna1 Kārtavīrya, Haihaya king The Haihaya king Arjuna had, arms, and, by the favour of Dattātreya, he had obtained a golden vimāna that could proceed everywhere without obstruction, and ruled over all beings . The gods and ṛṣis asked Viṣṇu to kill him. On his celestial vimāna. Arjuna affronted Indra, when he was sporting with Śaśī. After having held a consultation with Indra, Viṣṇu went to his hermitage Badarī, Once, when the sons of Jamadagni had gone out, Arjuna Kārtavīrya, the lord of the country near the sea shore, came to the hermitage, and, being received hospitably by Reṇukā, carried off the calf of the homadhenu and pulled n the trees. As Jamadagni told Rāma this, Rāma rushed towards Arjuna, and cut n his, arms with his arrows, and killed him. The heirs of Arjuna came while Rāma was away, and shot Jamadagni to death with their arrows. When they had gone away Rāma returned to the hermitage, After having lamented for and cremated his father, Rāma vowed the slaughter of the entire kṣattriya caste, killed Kārtavīryas sons, etc. b, Meanwhile the virtuous kṣattriya, the Haihaya king Arjuna Kārtavīrya, with, arms through the grace of Dattātreya, having subjugated the whole earth with its mountains and seven islands, became a powerful emperor, and gave away the earth to the brahmans in a horse sacrifice. Solicited by Agni, he once gave alms to that deity, who sprung from the point of his shaft, i.e. Agni burnt villages, etc and he burnt also the retreat of Āpava, who cursed Arjuna, saying that Rāma should lop off his arms. Always devoted to peace, always regardful of brahmans, etc Arjuna did not mind that curse. His sons, always haughty and cruel, seized and brought away the calf of Jamadagnis homa cow, without the knowledge of Arjuna. Rāma lopped off the arms of Arjuna and brought back the calf the sons of Arjuna came and slew Jamadagni in the absence of Rāma, who vowed to free the earth of kṣattriyas, and slaughtered all the sons and grandsons of Arjuna, and, Haihayas, and freed the earth of all kṣattriyas, etc . b, ff The Haihaya king Arjuna Kārtavīrya with, arms became the lord of this whole world, residing in Māhiṣmatī he gave large gifts to Dattātreya, who granted him four boons that he should have, arms in battle, but only two at home that he should subjugate the whole earth righteously and reign with vigilance and that whenever he might happen to go wrong, the righteous should set him right. A. now regarded himself as having no equal. An invisible voice said that the brahman is superior to the kṣattriya A. maintained that the brahmans take refuge with the kṣattriyas shall bring the skin clad brahmans under my sway. Vāyu warned A addressing him from the air, etc. At last Arjuna praised the brahmans, mentioning Dattātreya. Vāyu told him always to protect them a terrible danger threatens thee from the Bhṛgus that will take place after a time, . c, The, armed king Kārtavīryārjuna conquered the whole earth with his bow once he showered hundreds of arrows at the ocean. The ocean asked him to desist, as he injured the creatures in the waters Arjuna asked if there existed any bowman who was his equal in shooting. The Ocean named Rāma Jāmadagnya. Arjuna came and began to trouble him Rāma burnt his troops and prostrated him with his battle axe and drove away his kinsmen to the mountain fastnesses their progeny became Vṛṣalas owing to their inability to find brahmans so the Draviḍas, etc. Paraśu Rāma . also Anūpapati, Haihaya, Haihayendra, Haihayādhipati, Haihayarṣabha, Haihayaśreṣṭha, Kārtavīrya.
Arjuna2 Pāṇḍava . After Pāṇḍu had been cursed, that he should have no progeny, he caused Dharma to procreate Yudhiṣṭhira in Kuntī, then Vāyu to procreate Bhīmasena, and then Indra to procreate Arjuna. d, In order to propitiate Indra, Pāṇḍu, took counsel with the maharṣis, and caused Kuntī to observe an auspicious vow for a full year, while he himself began to stand upon one leg, etc. After the birth of A. a bodyless voice said that he should subjugate the Madras, the Kurus, the Somakas, the Cedis, Kāśis, and Karūṣas, and satiate Havyavāhana in the Khāṇḍava wood with the fat of all beings, and, with his brothers, perform three sacrifices in battle he would gratify Śaṅkara, and receive from him the Pāśupata weapon, and, at the command of Indra, slay the Nivātakavacas, and acquire all sorts of celestial weapons, . On hearing this voice, the ascetics dwelling on Śataśṛṅga became ex ceedingly glad. There was heard the sound of dundubhis, and flowers were showered n. The various tribes of celestials, etc came there . Then the Aśvins procreated the twins Nakula and Sahadeva in Mādrī . Having been procreated on Śataśṛṅga in behalf of Pāṇḍu by the gods Dharma, Vāyu, Indra, and the Aśvins in Pāṇḍus wives Kuntī and Mādrī, the five Pāṇḍavas after the death of Pāṇḍu were brought to Hāstinapura and educated by Droṇa, under the supervision of Bhīṣma. Their cousins hated them, especially Duryodhana, who tried to murder Bhīmasena and later on all the Pāṇḍavas and Kuntī, and Karṇa hated Arjuna from jealousy. b, One day Droṇa asked his pupils to promise to accomplish what he had on his heart only Arjuna promised it. Arjuna became the foremost of all his fellow pupils. Droṇa gave every one of his pupils a narrow mouthed vessel for fetching water, in order that much time might be spent in filling it, but to Aśvatthāman he gave a broad mouthed vessel, and in the intervals so gained he used to instruct his son in several superior methods but Arjuna filled the vessel by means of the Vāruṇa weapon, and used to come at the same time as Aśvatthāman. Droṇa told the cook never to give Arjuna his food in the dark, but not to tell him that it was he that had ordered this. One day a wind put the lamp out when Arjuna was taking his food but his hand went up to his mouth from habit. His attention being thus called to the force of habit, Arjuna practised with his bow in the night, and Droṇa promised him that there should not be a bowman equal to him in the world. He taught him also to fight on horseback, etc with the mace, etc . e, Arjuna excelled everyone in every respect, and alone became an atiratha f, . One day Droṇa caused an artificial bird to be placed on the top of a tree, and first repeatedly asked Yudhiṣṭhira to tell what he did see, while aiming at the bird. He answered that he saw the tree, Droṇa, his brothers, and the bird. Droṇa reproachfully told him to stand apart. Then Droṇa repeated the experiment with his other pupils, with the same result . At last Arjunas turn came he said first that he saw only the vulture, and then that he saw only its head, and, when Droṇa gave the order, he struck off its head with his shaft Arjuna rescued the life of Droṇa by shooting with five arrows an alligator in the Gaṅgā that had seized his thigh. Droṇa gave him the weapon Brahmaśiras on the condition that he should not use it against a human foe, as it might burn the whole universe. b, Then Arjuna appeared, while Kuntī wept with joy, and Dhṛtarāṣṭra learned from Vidura who it was. By the Āgneya weapon Arjuna created fire, by the Vāruṇa water, by the Vāyavya air, by the Pārjanya clouds by means of the Pārvata a mountain came into being, and by the Antardhāna weapon it again disappeared, etc. he at one time shot five shafts together into the mouth of a moving iron boar, and discharged twenty one arrows into the hollow of a cows horn hung up in a rope and swaying to and fro At the show of arms Karṇa in vain challenged Arjuna . Arjuna helped Droṇa to subjugate Drupada, which favour Droṇa had asked as his fee. c, Droṇa taught Arjuna Brahmaśiras, on the condition that he should not hurl it at any human being, and obtained from him as his fee the promise that he would fight with him . Then Arjuna went away to the northern region . Headed by Arjuna, the Pāṇḍavas in war slew Sauvīra, who had performed a three years sacrifice at the inroad of the Gandharvas. The Yavana king, whom even Pāṇḍu had failed to subject, was subdued by Arjuna as was also the Sauvīra Vitula, who had always shown a dis regard for the Kurus and the Sauvīra Sumitra, called Dattāmitra assisted by Bhīma, Arjuna with only a single chariot subjugated all the kings of the east backed by, chariots and in the same way the south. Dhṛtarāṣṭras sentiments towards the Pāṇḍavas suddenly became poisoned, and from anxiety he could not sleep The Pāṇḍavas went to the Pāñcāla land in the company of brahmans who told them of the svayaṃvara, etc.i.e. Arjunai.e. Arjunaaccomplished in the Brāhma and the Paurandara weapons, v. Page0 a Vaivāhikap.v. Vidurāgam.Rājyalā bhap.IndraprasthaArjunavanavāsap.upon whom he begat a sonSubhadrāhar.Haraṇāharaṇap.Śrutakarman by ArjunaKhāṇḍavadah.both the Āgneya and the Vāyavya, ff.GāndharvaiḥPage0 b ViśvakarmanSabhākriyāp.Kṛṣṇa departed for DvārakāRājasūyār.Jarāsandhavadhap.Digvijap.cf. DigvijayaparvanSaptadvīpeṣu, i.e. the Earth, see BR ṛṣikulyāhPage0 a frogsdvāra pālāḥ, Rājasūyikap.Śiśupālav.Arghāharaṇap. a, .Dyūtap.Kṛṣṇa is the soul of Arjuna, and vice versaAnudyūtap.Āraṇyakap.Page0 b Kirmīrav.Arjunābhigam.i.e. KṛṣṇaSaubhavadhop.Dvaitavanapr.Draupadī paritāp.she compared A. to Arjuna Kārtavīrya, etc.discourse between Kṛṣṇā and Yudhi ṣṭhiraArjuna is incomparable in battleKāmyakav.A. is a mighty ṛṣi, the friend of Nārāyaṇa, ancient, eternal, a god himselfIndradarśanaPratismṛtiKairātap.which got from thee by my power of illusioncdṛṣṭisaying that in ancient kalpas A. had ever gone through ascetic austerities along with themcIndralok.i.e. the PurāṇaPage0 a the desire of the man that listens to this history of A. never runs after lustful ends, etc.Nalop.Tīrthay.bexcept ArjunaGandhamādanapr.bBhīmakadalīkhaṇḍaprav.Yakṣayuddhap.Nivātakavacayuddhap.Page0 b conducted by MātaliIndraajarāṃcf. see Ājagarap.NahuṣaMārkaṇḍeyas.Ghoṣayātrāp.of DvaitavanaPage0 a C. Sthūlāśabdavedhaṃ samāśrityaDaityasMṛgasvapn.Draupadīharaṇap.Jayadrathavim.Kuṇḍalāharaṇap.Page0 b i.e. Arjuna, Karṇa was always desirous of fighting with Phālguna, and he and Karṇa used to challenge each other.Āraṇeyap.i.e. DharmaPāṇḍavapr.i.e. Arjuna cSamayapāl.Kīcakavadhap.Goharaṇap.i.e. Arjuna dB. iti viddhivajraPage0 a, v. f v. ff v. f.MādhavaŚivahave been my preceptors, v. ff.from the Gandharvasfrom JayadrathaVaivāhikap.it was by him that Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and Duryodhana were vanquishedSainyodyogap.Sañjayayānap etc. c i.e. ArjunaYānasandhip.Page0 b cf b, Kṛṣṇawho in height is higher than Arjuna by the span of the thumbYānas.i.e. Viśvakarman, Nīl.he who isandi.e. Prajāpati, Nīl.i.e. Arjunasi.e. Tvaṣṭṛ, Śakra, and Dhātṛ, Nīl.devamāyayāi.e. the rainbowBhagavadyānap.Dambhodbhavop.identified with NaraBhagavadyānap.Page0 a Sainyaniryānap. Ulūkadūt. Rathātirathas.Ambop.Bhagavadg.śucīmukhaPage0 b BhagavadgītāBhīṣmav. e, i.e. Sātyaki = Yuyudhāna Bhīṣma, etc. b, Page0 a having vanquished Suśarman, etc. bAlambuṣa Page0 b for aid employing celestial weaponsDroṇābhiṣ.cranePage0 a Sañjaya begins his narrative in detailwith his weapons received from Indra and Rudra, etc.Saṃśaptakavadhap. upon his elephant, including, Gopālāḥ or NārāyaṇāḥcPage0 b Abhimanyuvadhap.Pratijñāp.who were always acceptable to him, his oathDevapuraṃDiteḥ puraṃ, Page0 a, who had mentioned A.s Yudhiṣṭhira and A. went in one chariot to see Bhīṣma, together with KṛṣṇadescriptionYudhiṣṭhira asked A. to see that his chariot was made readyKṛṣṇadescriptionArjunaone of the five secret names which Yudhiṣṭhira gave to the Pāṇḍavas when with Virāṭa
Arjuna3, a ṛṣi in the palace of Yama .
Arjunābhigamanaparvan. Hearing that the Pāṇḍavas had been banished, the Bhojas, Vṛṣṇis, Andhakas, the heirs of Pañcāla, the Cedi king Dhṛṣṭaketu, the brothers Kaikeya went to see them. As Kṛṣṇa said the earth shall drink the blood of Duryodhana, etc Arjuna tried to pacify him by reciting the feats achieved in his former lives then Arjuna, the soul of Kṛṣṇa, became silent, and Janārdana replied that he was identical with Arjuna. Then Pāñcālī, surrounded by Dhṛṣṭadyumna and her other brothers, praised Kṛṣṇa . She then blamed him and the Pāṇḍavas for having let her endure the shame of being dragged in the assembly, etc and relates the persecutions of Duryodhana and the valour of Bhīma until the svayaṃvara. Kṛṣṇa promised that she should be avenged, and Dhṛṣṭadyumna said will slay Droṇa Śikhaṇḍin Pitāmaha Bhīmasena Duryodhana and Dhanañjaya Karṇa assisted by Rāma and Kṛṣṇa we are invincible in battle even to Indra . Kṛṣṇa said that if he had not been absent from Dvārakā at that time, he should have come and prevented the gambling by either persuading Dhṛtarāṣṭra, or compelling him by force on arriving at Dvārakā he had learnt from Yuyudhāna what had happened and had instantly come to see them . Saubhavadhop. . Dvaīta vanapraveśa . Draupadī paritāpa vākya . Kāmyakavana praveśa . Indradarśana . For continuation v. Kairātaparvan.
Arjunadāyāḍa = Abhimanyu .
Arjunāgraja = Bhīmasena, .
Arjunaka, a hunter .
Arjunanandana = Abhimanyu, .
Arjunapūrvaja = Bhīmasena, .
Arjunasuta, .
Arjunasyābhigamana .
Arjunasya vanavāsaḥ .
Arjunasya vane vāsaḥ .
Arjunātmaja1 = Abhimanyu, .
Arjunātmaja2 = Irāvat, .
Arjunavanavāsaparvan . The Pāṇḍavas continued to reside there, and by their prowess they brought many kings under their sway, and on account of their virtue the whole race of the Kurus grew in prosperity. After some time robbers lifted the cattle of a brahman, who then repaired to Khāṇḍava prastha and reproved the Pāṇḍavas. Arjuna heard it but the chamber where the Pāṇḍavas had their weapons being then occupied by Yudhiṣṭhira with Kṛṣṇā, Arjuna was obliged to violate the established rule by entering the chamber. Then, armed with the bow and attired in mail and riding on his war chariot decked with flagstaffs, he pursued the thieves and compelled them to give up the booty. Then, notwith standing Yudhiṣṭhiras objections, he went to the forest to live there for twelve years . Arjuna set out followed by brahmans conversant with the vedas and vedāṅgas and devoted to the contemplation of the Supreme Spirit, by mendicants devoted to Bhagavat, by reciters of the Purāṇas, and by reciters of sacred stories, etc and settled at Gaṅgādvāra, where the brahmans performed innumerable agnihotras. One day when Arjuna had performed his ablutions in the Gaṅgā, and offered the oblations of water to his deceased ancestors, and when he was about to rise up from the stream desirous of performing his sacrificial rites before the fire, he was drawn away to the bottom of the water by Ulūpī, the daughter of the Nāga king Kauravya of the lineage of Airāvata, urged by the god of desire. There he saw a sacrificial fire, where he performed his sacrificial rites, by which Agni was much gratified. Ulūpī persuaded him that it was a greater merit to give himself up to her than to keep the vow of a brahmacārin, and having spent the night there, he in the morning, accompanied by Ulūpī, came back to Gaṅgādvāra. Ulūpī, taking leave of him there, said that he would be invincible in water . Then he set out towards the Himavat and came to Agastyavaṭa and the mountain of Vasiṣṭha in Bhṛgutuṅga he bestowed many thousands of kine, etc on brahmans and visited many tīrthas . At the gate of the king of Kaliṅga the brahmans desisted from following him further he crossed Kaliṅga, beheld the Mahendra mountain aned with the ascetics, and went to Maṇipūra, proceeding slowly along the seaṣore. There he married Citrāṅgadā, the daughter of king Citravāhana, and dwelt there for three years. When Citrāṅgadā had given birth to a son, Arjuna set out on his wanderings again . Then Arjuna went to the tīrthas at the southern ocean. There five tīrthas were shunned on account of five crocodiles that seized the devotees Agastyatīrtha, Saubhadra, Pauloma, Kārandhama, and Bhāradvājas tīrtha. Arjuna plunged into the Saubhadra, and was seized by a crocodile, which he dragged to the shore. It then became the apsaras Vargā, the friend of Dhanapati . When she with her four companions, going to the abode of Kubera, had in vain tempted an ascetic brahman, that brahman had cursed them, saying that they should become crocodiles for years . Vargā said As we asked the ṛṣi to grant us par, he said and, are all indicative of eternity but the words as employed by me is to be understood as a limited period you will be delivered by an exalted individual, and those waters shall become sacred and purifying under the name of Nārītīrthāni. The devarṣi Nārada directed us to these lakes, and said that Dhanañjaya would soon deliver us. Arjuna then also delivered the other four apsarases. Then he pro ceeded to Maṇipūra to see Citrāṅgadā with her he had begotten king Babhruvāhana. Then he proceeded towards Gokarṇa . Then Arjuna visited the tīrthas on the shores of the western ocean, and arrived at Prabhāsa. There Madhusūdana visited him, and he and Arjuna, who were the ṛṣis Nara and Nārāyaṇa, sported there for some time. Then they went to the Raivataka mountain, after Kṛṣṇa had caused this mountain to be well aned by many artifices there he saw the performances of the actors and the dancers. The next morning they set out for Dvārakā, welcomed by the Bhojas, Vṛṣṇis, and Andhakas. There he dwelt in the mansion of Kṛṣṇa for many days .
Arjunāvara but B. has Arjunād varaḥ .
Ārjuni1 = Abhimanyu, .
Ārjuni2 = Śrutakīrti, .
Arjuni3 = Irāvat, .
Arka1 = Sūrya, .
Arka2 = Viṣṇu .
Arka3, an ancient king .
Arka4, .
Arkaja .
Arkaparṇa .
Arkaputra = Karṇa, .
Arṇavālaya = Śiva .
Ārohaṇa = Śiva .
Ārṣa, adj .
Ārṣabha .
Ārṣṭiṣeṇa1, a ṛṣi . . In the Kṛta age Ā though residing for a long time in his preceptors house, and attending to his lessons every could not master any branch of knowledge or the Vedas. By austere penances he then acquired the mastery of the Vedas and great learning and became perfect in that tīrtha, and bestowed three boons on it from this day a person who bathes in this tīrtha, shall obtain the benefit of a horse sacrifice from this day no fear from snakes and wild beasts will be in this tīrtha small exertions in this place will lead to great results. Then the muni proceeded to heaven .
Ārṣṭiṣeṇa2, a ṛṣi in the palace of Yama .
Ārṣyaśṛṅga, .
Ārṣyaśṛṅgi, . ga.
Ārtāyani = Śalya.
Artha .
Arthaśāstra .
Arthakara = Śiva .
Ārtimat . Asita1.
Āruja .
Aruṇa1 Son of Kaśyapa and Vinatā came out of the egg, though not yet full grown, and cursed his mother Carried by Garuḍa and placed in the east At this time Sūrya, who was in danger of being devoured by Rāhu, and did not obtain any help, became wroth, and from the mountains of the west began to destroy the world with heat. The gods and ṛṣis repaired to Brahmán, who ordered Aruṇa to become the charioteer of the Sun and take away the Suns glow Begotten in consequence of the Vālikhilyas having cursed Indra, and destined by Kaśyapa to become the brother and helpmate of Indra . b, . u, .
Aruṇa2 = Śiva, etc.
Aruṇa3 = Sūrya, .
Aruṇa4, pl .
Aruṇā .
Aruṇā, a river . p, . t, Formerly the presence of that river at its site was concealed. Sarasvatī repaired to the Aruṇā and flooded it with her waters. This confluence of Sarasvatī and Aruṇā is highly sacred. Brahmán caused Indra to bathe in the Aruṇā .
Aruṇānuja = Garuḍa.
Aruṇātmaja = Jaṭāyu .
Arundhatī, the wife of Vasiṣṭha b, A. became jealous of Vasiṣṭha, one of the seven ṛṣis, etc. in consequence of this her presumption she has become a little star, like fire mixed with smoke, sometimes visible and sometimes invisible apadhyānena sā tena dhūmāruṇasamaprabhālakṣyā lakṣyā nābhirupā nimittam iva paśyati . z, Indra related to Śrutāvatī In this very tīrtha the seven Ṛ. had, on one occasion, left Arundhatī while they went to Himavat in order to gather fruits and roots. A drought occurred extending for twelve years the Ṛ having made an asylum for themselves, continued to live there in a forest of Himavat. Seeing Arundhatī devoted to penances, Śiva in the form of a brahman came to her and asked for alms, and, as her store of food was exhausted, he told her to cook jujubes. While she listened to his discourses and cooked, without food, that twelve years drought passed away to her as if it were a single day. Then the seven Ṛ. returned Mahādeva, in his own form, said that the ascetic merit of Arundhatī was much greater than theirs, and granted her the boon that this spot should become an excellent tīrtha named Badarapācana, resorted to by Si. and . ṛ and that he who observes a fast there and resides there for three nights after having cleansed himself should obtain the benefit of a twelve years fast. Then he repaired to heaven. Ṛ. wondered at the sight of the god and because Arundhatī was unfatigued and still possessed the hue of health, A. once explained to Ṛ P and . the mysteries of Dharma Brahmán granted her that her penances would continually increase.
Arundhatīpati = Vasiṣṭha, .
Arundhatīvaṭa, a tīrtha .
Āruṇi1 Pāñcālya, disciple of the ṛṣi Āyoda Dhaumya A. stopped a break in the dike of a field by laying himself n there, thence he was called Uddālaka.
Āruṇi2 present at the birth of Arjuna.
Āruṇi3, a serpent .
Āruṇi4 .
Āruṣī .
Arvāvasu Deceived by his brother Parāvasu, he composed the Rahasyaveda of the Sun, etc .
Arvuka, a people .
Āryā .
Āryā = Umā, q.v.
Āryāḥ, .
Āryaka, a serpent .
Aryaman1, one of the Ādityas . u, .
Aryaman2 = the Sun, .
Aryaman3 = Śiva .
Aryāvartta, a country in Bharatavarṣa, Hindustan .
Asahāya = Śiva, .
Asahya = Śiva, .
Asamāmnāya = Śiva .
Asamañjaḥsuta = Aṃśumat, .
Asamañjas1, At the request of Yudhiṣṭhira, Lomaśa related Asa mañjas, the son of Sagara and Śaibyā, used to seize the children of the citizens by the throat and throw them into the river. At the request of the citizens, Sagara caused his ministers to drive Asamañjas immediately from the city .
Asamañjas2, .
Asaṅga, a name of Chastisement .
Asañjña, v. Mahāpuruṣastava.
Asaṅkhyeya = Viṣṇu .
Asat = Śiva = Mahāpuruṣa, = Viṣṇu . Asataḥ prabhava, etc. = Śiva .
Asatyā .
Āṣāḍha1 .
Āṣāḍha2 = Śiva .
Āṣāḍha3, adj. .
Āṣāḍha4, pl a nakṣatra .
Āṣāḍhī .
Aṣṭādaśāvarāḥ .
Aṣṭaka Yayāti, who was the maternal grandfather of A discoursed with him on haughtiness, etc and told him his own history Yayāti spoke to A. of those who talk about their own merit, etc Continuation Yayāti said that he should now fall into the Bhauma hell The kings, A etc offered him their lokas, and would themselves go to hell Yayāti did not accept the offer then appeared five golden cars, in which they all five ascended to heaven Yayāti told them that he was their maternal grandfather, etc .
Aṣṭāvakra1, a ṛṣi Cursed by Kahoda Śvetaketu informed him who his father was they both go to the sacrifice of Janaka Aṣṭāvakra Dik s.Aṣṭāvakrasya saṃvādaṃ Diśayā sahavipraṣe
Aṣṭāvakra2, a tīrtha r, Bhīṣma mentioned the profit of bathing in A etc.
. b, ff. Bhīṣma said In days of yore Aṣṭāvakra asked Ṛ. Vadānya for his beautiful daughter Suprabhā. Vadānya first caused him to make a journey to the North, indicating the road Himavat the sacred river Bāhudā, where he bathed in one of the tīrthas, etc and worshipped Rudra and Umā Kailāsa, where he saw a golden gate, etc and was honoured by Kubera among Y G and K and where Aps. danced there he remained a celestial year having crossed Kailāsa and Mandara as also the golden mountains, he came to the region where Mahādeva resides attired as an ascetic, Pārṣadas of which are frolicsome and fond of dance and possessed of faces of diverse forms, which was peopled by Si Cā and Pc where Umā had practised austerities for the sake of Śiva where, in days of yore, on the Mahāpārśva the Seasons, etc in their material forms had aed Mahādeva a beautiful forest, where the river Mandākinī was seen, with an old and decrepit female ascetic, who in vain tempted him with love, at last appearing in a beautiful form . She turned out to be the goddess of the North, who, having been gratified by Ṛ. Vadānya, had devised this trial and now instructed him, showing him the levity of women, even when aged thou hast subjugated all the worlds by thy strength of mind thy journey back will not be irksome thou wilt obtain the wife thou hast chosen she will bear thee a son. Aṣṭāvakra came back to his own abode, and then to Vadānya, who wedded him to the girl. There he continued to dwell joyously in his own hermitage .
Aṣṭāvakrīya A. atraiva vivāyatra Bandinā, etc ff. Uddālaka gave his own daughter Sujātā in marriage, together with sacred learning, to his disciple the brahman Kahoda, who had served him long. The embryo in her womb had become versed in the Śāstras and the Vedas with the aṅgas, and blamed Kahoda, who had been reading the whole night. The great ṛṣi Kahoda cursed him to become crooked on eight parts of his body, wherefore he, when born, was called Aṣṭāvakra. In order to procure wealth for Sujātā, Kahoda went to king Janaka, where he was defeated in a controversy with the sūta Bandin and was immersed into water. Uddālaka prevailed upon Sujātā to keep it a secret from Aṣṭāvakra, who regarded Uddālaka as his father and Śvetaketu, the son of Uddālaka, who was of the same age with himself, as his brother, until in his year Śvetaketu in anger happened to disclose the matter to him. He and Śvetaketu then went to the sacrifice of Janaka, and on being driven from the entrance Aṣṭāvakra met the king, and in the course of a conversation with him and the rkeeper he compared Janaka to Yayāti, and said that he had heard that Bandin caused those whom he had vanquished in disputation to be drowned in the sea by men sent by Janaka, and he declared that he had come to maintain the unity with Bráhman and to defeat Bandin then he answered several enigmatical questions and was admitted . Here they disputed in such a way that Bandin enumerated things of which there is only, Aṣṭāvakra groups of, Ba of, A of, Ba of, A of, Ba of, A of, Ba of, A of, Ba of, A of . As Bandin had said the first half śloka with, he stopped, and Aṣṭāvakra fulfilled the śloka. Bandin was then deemed to be vanquished, and at the request of Aṣṭāvakra he merged into the sea, after he had declared himself to be the son of Varuṇa and that he had caused the brahmans to be drowned in order that they might see the twelve years sattra of Varuṇa that was performed simultaneously with that of Janaka. They at once reappeared, and Kahoda let Aṣṭāvakra bathe in the river Samaṅgā, and all his limbs were immediately made straight, and the Samaṅgā became a remover of sin. There fore you also should bathe there .
Asi . d, dharmagarbhena, its forms are the different sorts of punishment ib. e, its eight mysterious names, Asi, etc. foll etc.
Asiknī .
Asiloman .
Asipatravana .
Asita1 or Asita Devala or Devala, a ṛṣi . b, A.. has said that gambling is sinful, as is all deceitfulness In Ādityatīrtha Ṛ. A.. lived in days of yore, observant of the duties of a householder he always practised the vow of brahmacarya. Once the ascetic mendicant . Jaigīṣavya, devoted to yoga, came to Devalas hermitage and attained to success . Devala always kept his eyes on him. After a long time, Devala on one occasion lost sight of Jaigīṣavya at the hour of dinner, however, he approached Devala in order to solicit alms, and . worshipped him, after the rites laid n by Ṛ for many years but Jaigīṣavya never spoke a single word to him. . proceeded to the shore of the ocean, journeying through the welkin and bearing his earthen jug with him there he saw Jaigīṣavya who had arrived there before him, at which M. ṛ. A. wondered much. Having finished his ablutions and silent prayers, . returned to his hermitage, bearing with him his earthen vessel filled with water. Entering his own hermitage, he saw Jaigīṣavya seated there. . then soared aloft into the sky in order to ascertain who Jaigīṣavya really was. He saw crowds of sky ranging Si. rapt in meditation, and he saw Jaigīṣavya, reverentially worshipped by them, and he became filled with wonder at the sight. He saw Jaigīṣavya set out for the Pitṛloka Yāmyaloka, etc. . At last he was seen to pass into the regions of the brahmasattvins, then through three other regions to those of chaste women and such as are devoted to their husbands. At this point A. lost sight of him, and enquiring of the foremost of Si. in the regions of the brahmasattvins, he was told that Jaigīṣavya had gone to the eternal region of Brahman. A. endeavoured to soar aloft but he soon fell n, and the Si. declared that he was not worthy to proceed thither. . came n, descending from one region to another in due order, to his hermitage, where he again beheld Jaigīṣavya, who taught him the religion of Emancipation and the ordinances of yoga, etc and performed all the acts according to the rites for that end. Then all creatures with P. began to weep, saying, Who will henceforth give us food . then thought of renouncing the religion of mokṣa then all kinds of fruits and roots, etc began to weep, saying, The wicked hearted . will once more pluck and eat us, having once assured all creatures of his perfect harmlessness. Then . abaned the religion of a householder and ated that of mokṣa, and obtained the highest success and the highest yoga. . with Bṛh. applauded Jaigīṣavya only Nārada contradicted e, .
Asita2, a king conquered by Māndhātṛ . b, .
Asita3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Asita4, a mountain .
Asitadhvaja .
Asnehana = Śiva .
Asta, the place in the west where the sun sets, a, b, .
Āstīka Some read the Mahābhārata beginning with Ā The deliverance of the Serpents by the brahman Ā. mighty in spiritual energy and having mastered the Vedas and the Vedāṅgas Āstīkaparvan . Āsya kaveḥ sādhoḥ Destined by Brahmán to rescue the harmless among the Serpents Ā. was born and reared in Vāsukis house etymology of his name . How he appeared at the Snake sacrifice and rescued the remaining Serpents, . The reason why Takṣaka had not fallen into the fire was that Ā. had said thrice, Stay. Janamejaya let the sacrifice come to an end he bestowed wealth upon Lohitākṣa, etc. A. returned home after having promised that he would become a sadasya at Janamejayas horse sacrifice he obtained the boon from the Snakes that those, who in the morning or the evening cheerfully read the sacred account of his act, should have no fear from them nor should those who recall Asita, Ārtimat, and Sunītha to their minds nor those who would say, recall the famous Āstīka, etc to my mind. Ā. at last died, leaving sons and grandsons behind him Āstīkasya kaver caritaṃ . b, .
Āstīka = Āstīkaparvan, When the Ā. is being recited, should be entertained with fruits and roots, and frumenty, and honey and clarified butter, and rice boiled with raw sugar .
Āstīka ākhyāna, .
the of the minor parvans Sauti related how the ascetic Jaratkāru, upon a woman, likewise named Jaratkāru, being the sister of the Serpent king Vāsuki, begot a son destined to neutralize the curse inflicted on the Serpents by their mother Origin of the Serpents and of Garuḍa and Aruṇa In order to explain the origin of Uccaiḥśravas, Sauti related the churning of the Ocean and the consequent production of the Amṛta, etc Kadrū and Vinatā made a bet as to the colour of the tail of Uccaiḥśravas, and Vinatā became the slave of Kadrū Kadrū cursed the Serpents, her sons, to be burnt at the Snake sacrifice of Janamejaya exploits of Garuḍa Aruṇa became the charioteer of the Sun Garuḍa set out to bring the Amṛta to the Snakes, who had promised that he and his mother should on this condition be freed from bondage Vibhāvasu and Supratīka, and Garuḍas meeting with the Vālikhilyas omens foreboding fear appeared among the gods, owing to Indras having formerly been cursed by the Vālikhilyas Garuḍa snatched the Amṛta, made friendship with Viṣṇu and Indra, and placed the Amṛta before the Snakes, who declared Vinatā to be free but Indra took it from them Enumeration of the principal Snakes. Śeṣa . Consultation of the Serpents under Vāsuki it became known that Āstīka would be born and save the harmless serpents. Etymology of Jaratkāru. King Parikṣit, the son of Abhimanyu, was cursed and consequently struck to death by Takṣaka Kāśyapa was bribed to return without curing him. Janamejaya succeeded his father Parikṣit. The story of Jaratkāru repeated and some what enlarged. Jaratkāru left his wife. Āstīka was born, and reared by Vāsuki. The ministers of Janamejaya told him about Parikṣit The ministers of Janamejaya learned what had happened between Takṣaka and Kāśyapa. Jana mejaya resolved to avenge his father and Utaṅka. Janamejaya made preparations for a Snake sacrifice. b Janamejayas Snake sacrifice enumeration of the principal Snakes that fell into the fire, of Vāsukis, Takṣakas, Airāvatas, Kauravyas . and Dhrta rāṣṭras race . Sauti said This story have told, as Pramati narrated it to Ruru, after having heard what was said by the ḍuṇḍubha.
Astradarśana When the princes had become accomplished in arms Droṇa addressed Dhṛtarāṣṭra in the presence of Kṛpa, Somadatta, Bāhlīka, Bhīṣma, Vyāsa, and Vidura, asking him to let them show their proficiency. Vidura then let Droṇa measure out a place, and Kuntī, Gāndhārī, etc and the citizens came out to behold the princes skill. Droṇa and Aśvatthāman appeared like the Moon accompanied by the planet Mars . The spectators, seeing the prowess of the princes, fancied they were beholding the city of the Gandharvas. Vidura described all the feats of the princes to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and Kuntī to Gāndhārī . A combat with maces between Duryodhana and Bhīma divided the spectators into two parties, until Droṇa caused Aśvatthāman to separate them. The exploits of Arjuna were quite wonderful. Droṇa stood surrounded by the five Pārthas like the Moon in conjunction with the five starred Sāvitra, and Duryodhana, mace in hand, surrounded by his brothers and Aśvatthāman, was like Purandara encircled by the hosts of gods on the occasion of the victory over the Dānavas . Karṇa enters and challenges Arjuna. The Dhārtarāṣṭras stood by Karṇa, while Droṇa, Kṛpa, and Bhīṣma remained with Arjuna. Kuntī swooned away, and was restored to consciousness by Vidura, who caused sandal paste and water to be sprinkled on her person. Kṛpa rejects Karṇa but Duryodhana then installed Karṇa as king of Aṅga . The sun went n Duryodhana led Karṇa out of the arena, and the Pāṇḍavas, accompanied by Droṇa, Kṛpa, and Bhīṣma, returned to their abodes .
Asura1, pl the enemies of the gods, participated with the gods in the churning of the Ocean, would possess themselves of the ambrosia, but were vanquished . . . b, . j, . u, . gg, . b, . b, b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . b
Asura2, sg . b, . Names of single Asuras Aśva, . Bali, . Balīna, . Bāṇa, . Bhagadatta, . Candrahantṛ, . Śarabha, . Śatamukha, . Śaṭha, . Daṃśa, . Dhundhu, . Ekacakra, . Gaviṣṭha, . Hiraṇyakaśipu, . Hiraṇyākṣa, . Ilvala, . Jambha, . Jarāsandha, . Kaiṭabha, . Kāleyāḥ, . Keśin, . Krathana, . Krodhahantṛ, . Kupatha, . Mada, . Madhu, . Maya, . Mayūra, . Mṛtapā, . Namuci, . Naraka, . Nicandra, . Pīṭha, . Prahlāda, . Sunda, . Sūrya, . Svarbhānu, . Tāraka, . Upasunda, . Sunda. Vātāpi, . Viśvarūpa, . Vikṣara, . Vināśanaḥ Candrasya, . Virūpākṣa, . Vṛṣaparvan, . Vṛtra, .
Asurā, one of the daughters of Prādhā .
Āsura, adj .
Asuraśreṣṭha = Namuci, = Vṛtra, .
Asurādhipa1 = Bali, .
Asurādhipa2 = Prahlāda, .
Asuradviṣ, pl = the brahmarṣis and brahmans.
Asurahan = Śiva, .
Asurarāj = Baka, .
Asurārdana = Indra, .
Asurasūdana = Indra = Viṣṇu .
Āsurāyaṇi, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Asurendra = Bali, = Prahlāda, = Vṛtra, au = Madhu and Kaiṭabha, .
Asurendrasutā = Śarmiṣṭhā, .
Asurī, .
Āsuri. b, .
Asūrya .
Ataka, a Nāga .
Atandrita = Śiva .
Ātapana = Śiva .
Aṭavī .
Aṭavīśikhara, pl .
Aṭavika, pl. .
Atharva = Śiva, or Ā, pl. = Artharvaveda, .
Atharvaśiras1, an Upaniṣad, . Do. = Mahāpuruṣa .
Atharvaśīrṣa = Śiva .
Atharvan1 .
Atharvan2 = Atharvaveda
Atharvan3, pl. = Atharvaveda, .
Ātharvaṇa, .
Atharvāṇa = Atharvaveda, .
Atharvāṅgiras = Aṅgiras .
Atharvāṅgirasa1 = Aṅgiras, . Do adj .
Atharvāṅgirasaḥ, a kind of ṛṣis .
Atharvāṅgirasāḥ, .
Atharvaveda, .
Aṭhida, v. Alinda.
Atibāhu.
Atibala1, u, .
Atibala2. b, Obtaining an extensive empire after the demise of his father, he became a slave of his passions.
Atibhīma .
Atiśṛṅga. u, .
Atidhūmra = Śiva .
Atidīpta = Śiva .
Atikāla = Śiva .
Atikṛcchra = Mahāpuruṣa .
Atīndra = Viṣṇu .
Atīndriya = Viṣṇu .
Atiratha .
Atisāra, v. Abhisāra.
Atiṣaṇḍa .
Atiṣṭhira. u, .
Atithi. b, .
Ativarcas. u, .
Ativṛddha = Śiva .
Atiyaśas = Kṛṣṇa, .
Atiyama. u, .
Ātman1, = Śiva, Kṛṣṇa .
Ātmanirāloka = Śiva .
Ātmasambhava = Śiva .
Ātmastha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ātmavat = Viṣṇu .
Ātmayoni1 = Kṛṣṇa, = Viṣṇu .
Ātreya1 .
Ātreya2, pl. .
Ātreyī .
Ātreyī .
Atri1, a ṛṣi. b, His discourse with Gautama as to who is to be styled the foremost of sovereigns he gets large gifts from king Vainya, . e, . u, . b, . c, . b, The wife of Atri abaned her husband and sought the protection of Mahā deva, who granted her that she should obtain a son without Atri, . b, . j, . m Vāyu said Once the gods and Dā. were fighting each other in the dark. Rāhu pierced both Sūrya and Soma with his arrows. The gods repaired to the brahman Ṛ. Atri, who becoming the Moon and Sun dispelled the darkness and burnt the As who were now slain by the gods. Name thou a kṣattriya superior to Atri, .
Atri2 .
Atri3 = Śiva
Atrisuta = the Moon, .
Atryānamaskartṛ = Śiva .
Atulya = Śiva, = Viṣṇu .
Atyugra, = Śiva.
Auśanasa .
Auśanasī = Devayānī, .
Auśija . Auśija.
Auśīnara1 . b, .
Auśīnara2, adj. .
Auśīnari .
Auśīnarī .
Audbhida .
Auddālaka .
Auddālaki a ṛṣiĀnuśāsan.Śvetaketuḥ among the ṛṣis of the North
Auḍra .
Audra .
Audumbara .
Aupaniṣada, .
Auraga, .
Aurasikāḥ .
Aurva son of Cyavana and Āruṣī and father of Ṛcīka, . g, . g, . Bhārgava, Bhṛgunandana.
Aurva Ākhyāna i.e. Aurvopākhyāna.
Aurvopākhyāna . King Kṛtavīrya, the yājya of the Bhṛgus, at the end of the Soma sacrifice gratified the brahmans with large offerings. After he had ascended to heaven, it came to happen that his descendants were in want of wealth. Knowing that the Bhṛgus were rich, they went to them and begged. Some amongst the Bhṛgus buried their wealth under the earth, some gave it away to brahmans, and some duly gave it to the kṣattriyas. Some kṣattriyas, while digging at the house of a Bhārgava, came upon a large treasure. The kṣattriyas then began to kill the Bhṛgus with their arrows all over the earth, even the embryos. A Bhṛgu woman fled to Himavat, holding an embryo in one of her thighs . From fear a brahman woman reported this to the kṣattriyas. The kṣattriyas then went to destroy that embryo, which, how ever, came out, tearing open the thigh and dazzling the eyes of the kṣattriyas so that they lost their sight. They asked the woman that they might be restored to sight, promising to abstain from their sinful practice . She told them to ask the child, which they did, and regaining their eye sights they went away. The child was named Aurva, because he had been born after tearing open his mothers thigh . Aurva devoted himself to the austerest of penances with the object of destroying the whole world to gratify his ancestors. The Pitṛs then all came from Pitṛloka, and said Be propitious towards the three worlds. Having grown weary with the long periods of life allotted to us, we desired our own destruction through the kṣattriyas. Such as commit suicide never attain to regions that are blessed, therefore we abstained from self destruction . When Aurva replied that his vow must not be in vain, the Pitṛs prevailed upon him to throw his wrath into the waters of the ocean, the whole universe being made of water. It became a large horse head, which, emitting fire from its mouth, consumes the waters of the ocean . Hearing this the viprarṣi Parāśara controlled his wrath from destroying the worlds. But he performed a great rākṣasa sacrifice and began to burn the rākṣasas in it, and Vasiṣṭha did not restrain him. Desirous of ending that sacrifice the ṛṣi Atri came to that place, and also Pulastya and Pulaha and Kratu, desiring to save the rākṣasas. Seeing that many rākṣasas had already been slain, Pulastya said That which befell thy father was brought about by his own curse No rākṣasa was capable of devouring Śakti he himself provided for his own death Viśvāmitra was only a blind instrument in that matter. Both Śakti and Kalmāṣapāda have ascended to heaven, and are enjoying great happiness, as also the other sons of Vasiṣṭha. Aban this sacrifice of thine. Parāśara then brought his sacrifice to an end, and threw the fire into the woods on the north of the Himavat, where it may be seen to this day consuming rākṣasas and trees and stones in all seasons .
Auṣadaśvi .
Auṣadha = Viṣṇu .
Auṣadhi, .
Auṣija, .
Autaṅka, .
Auttānapāda, .
Avācīna .
Avaśa = Śiva .
Avaśavartin Mahāpuruṣastave.
Āvaśīrāḥ .
Āvaha q, The second wind called Ā. blows with a great noise it is this wind that causes Soma and the other luminaries to rise and appear. Within the body that wind is called Udāna by the wise.
Avākīrṇa .
Avantī .
Avanti, pl. .
Āvantya . Dyūtap.Aāḥ tv abhiṣekārtham āpo . apo bahuvidhās tathāYānasandhip.Āvantyo, tha JayadrathaḥĀvantya Kāliṅga JayadratheṣuBhagavadgītāp.Āvantyo, tha Jayadrathaḥ, Vindānuvindau...Bhīṣmavadhap.Jayadrathav.Śalyap.Ao, tha JayadrathaḥStrīvil.slain by Bhīma
Avara = Śiva .
Avarṇa = Śiva .
Āvartana = Viṣṇu .
Āvasathya .
Avatata = Śiva .
Āveśa = Śiva .
Āvedanīya = Śiva .
Avijñātagati .
Avijñātṛ = Viṣṇu .
Avijñeya Mahāpuruṣastave.
Avikalpana . b, a king
Avikṣit1 .
Avikṣit2. e, King A. Kārandhama, son of Suvarcas, lived at the beginning of the Tretā age, and was equal to Indra, Bṛhaspati, and Himavat all kings were under his control he was given to sacrifices, he performed hundreds of horse sacriflces, and Aṅgiras himself served as his priest, .
Āvikṣita, .
Avimūḍhāḥ, a kind of ṛṣis .
Avimukta .
Avindhya .
Avisthala .
Avṛhaka a, .
Avṛtta .
Avyakta1 = Kṛṣṇa, Mahāpuru ṣastave = Viṣṇu = Śiva .
Avyaktanidhana Mahāpuruṣastave.
Avyaktarūpa1 = Śiva, = Viṣṇu .
Avyaktayoni = Śiva, .
Avyaṅga = Viṣṇu .
Avyaya1, . Do a serpent, .
Ayaḥśaṅku .
Ayaḥśiras .
Ayana = Skanda, .
Ayati .
Āyāti .
Ayobāhu .
Āyoda Dhaumya = Āyoda Dhaumya athāparaḥ śiṣyas tasyaiv Āyodadhaumyasyopamanyur nāma athāparaḥ śiṣyas tasyaiv Āyodadhaumyasya Venāma. Ās ṭeeth were of iron .
Āyoda Dhaumya, a Ṛṣi. About the time of king Janamejaya, son of Parikṣit, there was a Ṛṣi named Ā. Dh. with three disciples Upamanyu, Āruṇi Pāñcalya, and Veda ĀyoDhaumyaḥ. Āyoda Dhaumya.
Ayodhyā .
Ayodhyādhipati = Rāma Dāśa rathi, .
Ayoga, a caste, .
Āyogava, .
Ayonija = Viṣṇu, .
Āyu . e, ṣaḥ putro NahuṣaḥĀnuśāsan.ĀyunāthānaraṇyenaKṛṣṇason of Purūravas and father of NahuṣaĀnuśāsan.
Āyu2 .
Āyu = Śiva .
Āyudhin = Śiva .
Āyurveda .
Ayutākṣa = Śiva, .
Ayutanāyin . .
Bābhravāyaṇi. b, .
Bābhravya .
Babhru1 .
Babhru2, pl. .
Babhru3 . b, .
Babhru4 = Śiva, Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa, .
Babhru5 .
Babhrumālin .
Babhruvāha .
Babhruvāhana . Babhruvāha, Citrāṅgadāsuta, Citrāṅgadāt maja, Dhanañjayasuta, Maṇipūrapati, Maṇipūreśvara.
Badarapācana . y, There the beautiful Śrutāvatī, Bharadvājas daughter, a brahma cāriṇī, practised austerities for many years, desirous of obtaining Indra for her husband. Indra then came in the guise of B. ṛ. Vasiṣṭha, and told her that everything is attainable by penances, and asked her to boil five jujubes, when he went away to mentally recite certain mantras at Indratīrtha, that was not far away. She sat n to boil the jujubes, but in vain the day was about to wane her fuel was all consumed then she first thrust her feet into the fire, without changing a muscle of her face. Indra then showed himself in his own proper form, and said that her wish would be accomplished throwing off her body, she would live with him in heaven as his spouse and this tīrtha would be the foremost in the world and be called B. he granted her a boon superior to that granted to Arundhatī by Mahādeva the person who will reside in this tīrtha for only one night and bathe there with his soul fixed on meditation, will, after having thrown off his body, obtain many regions of blessedness difficult of acquisition. Then Indra went back to heaven a shower of celestial flowers poured n, etc and Śrutāvatī, throwing off her body, became the spouse of Indra. Badarīpācana.
Badarī . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, .
Badarikā = Badarī .
Badarīpācana .
Badhirāndha .
Bāheyika, .
Bahi, .
Bāhīka, pl. .
Bāhīka, a water among the Bāhīkas, .
Bahīnara .
Bāhl, v. Bālh.
Bāhu1 . Do . Do . b, .
Bāhubādhāḥ .
Bahubhūta = Śiva .
Bāhuśālin1 . Do. = Śiva
Bahuśiras = Viṣṇu .
Bāhudā .
Bāhudā . b, . m, .
Bahudāmā . u, .
Bāhudantaka .
Bahudhānindita = Śiva .
Bahudhānyaka .
Bahudhara = Śiva .
Bahudhātmaka = Hiraṇyagarbha, .
Bahuguṇa .
Bāhuka1 .
Bāhuka2 .
Bāhuka3, a prince .
Bāhukaṇṭaka .
Bahukarkaśa = Śiva .
Bahula1 = Śiva .
Bahulā . u, .
Bahulā .
Bahumāla = Śiva .
Bahumukha = Śiva .
Bahumūlaka .
Bahunetra = Śiva .
Bahuprada = Śiva .
Bahuprasāda = Śiva .
Bahuputrikā . u, .
Bahuraśmi = Śiva .
Bahurūpa = Śiva .
Bahuvādyāḥ, v. Bāhubādhāḥ.
Bahuvidya = Śiva .
Bahuyojanā . u, .
Bahvāśin .
Bahvṛca, .
Bāhyakarṇa .
Bāhyakuṇḍa .
Baka1 ff, .
Baka2 .
Baka3 In former times the Ṛ. residing in the Naimiṣa forest had performed a sacrifice which extended over twelve years. After the Viśvajit had been completed, the Ṛ. went to the country of the Pāñcālas and solicited the king to give them twenty one calves to be given away as dakṣiṇā. Dālbhya Baka gave them his, and then applied to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who, as some of his kine had died, angrily told him to take these. B. set his heart upon the destruction of king Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Cutting the flesh off from the dead animals, having ignited a fire on the tīrtha of the Sarasvatī, he poured those pieces as libations for the destruction of king Dhṛtarāṣṭras king, which began to waste away, until he, reminded by his counsellors, repairing to the bank of the Sarasvatī, had gratified Ṛ. B who, in order to free his king, again poured libations into the fire. Receiving many animals as a gift, he once more proceeded to the Naimiṣa wood, and Dhṛtarāṣṭra returned to his capital.
Baka4 .
Baka5, pl a people .
Baka bhrātṛ, . Cf .
Baka Śakra saṃvāda Yudhiṣṭhira, having heard that the ṛṣis Baka and Dālbhya were long lived and friends of Indra, asked Mārkaṇḍeya about the meeting of Baka and Indra. Mārkaṇḍeya related After the conflict between the gods and asuras was over, and Indra had become the ruler of the three worlds, all people were happy and virtuous. Once Indra, riding on Airāvata, surveyed his happy subjects, and, descending to earth, he made a visit to the ṛṣi Baka, who had lived for, years and was aed by gods and ṛṣis, in his hermitage in the east by the seaside. Indra asked him about the sorrows of those who have a long life. Baka mentioned several common disagreeable things, and finally, the having to witness the injustices that take place. Indra then asked him about their joys he mentioned the frugal life of a pious brahman, who only eats after having waited on his guest.
Bakanakha . b, .
Bakavadha .
Bakavadhaparvan ff. The Pāṇḍavas for some time dwelt in the abode of the brahman, living on alms Bhīma alone used to eat one half of the alms. One day Bhīma and Kuntī overheard the brahman complaining, and his wife and daughter asked to be sacrificed for him to a rākṣasa, and their little son said that he would slay the rākṣasa with a blade of grass. Kuntī approached, and learned that the rākṣasa Baka, a cannibal, protected the town and the country, receiving as his fee a cartload of rice, two buffaloes, and the human being who brought them to him, from one after another of the householders, while the king, residing in Vetrakīyagṛha, did nothing to protect the country against him. Now the turn had come for the brahman, and as he had no wealth to buy a man, and could not part with any of his family, he would go with all his family to the rākṣasa, in order that he might devour them all . Kuntī said that one of her sons would bring the food to the rākṣasa. This the brahman energetically refused, until she had told him that on account of his strength and mantras her son would be safe but he ought not to disclose this fact to anybody, for then people might trouble them out of curiosity, and if her son imparted his knowledge to anybody he would himself no longer be able to profit by it. Bhīma also consented . When the others returned home with their alms, Yudhiṣṭhira blamed his mother for her rash act but she relied on Bhīma . The next morning Bhīma set out for the abode of the rākṣasa, and approaching he began himself to eat the food he carried, loudly calling the rākṣasa by his name. The rākṣasa came out in a fury but Bhīma, disregarding his yells and blows, leisurely ate up the whole of that food and washed his hands. Then they began to hurl trees at each other, and thereupon they clasped each other with their arms. At last Bhīma pressed Baka n to the earth, and placing one knee on the middle of his back, bent him ble, while he roared frightfully and began to vomit blood . Baka died uttering frightful yells. The rākṣasas, his relatives, came and promised never again to kill human beings, and from that day the rākṣasas of that region were very peaceful towards mankind. Bhīma placed the corpse at one of the gates of the town, and went away unobserved. The brahman told the citizens that it was a brahman skilled in mantras who had slain the rākṣasa, and they established a Brahma festival .
Bakula = Śiva .
Bala1 . b, .
Bala2 .
Bala3 .
Bala4 . u, .
Bala .
Bala6 .
Bala7 .
Bala8 = Baladeva, .
Bala9 = Śiva ṃ .
Bāla = Śiva .
Balabandhu .
Balabhadra = Baladeva, .
Bālabhadrāḥ .
Balabhedana = Indra, .
Balabhid = Indra, .
Balacārin = Śiva .
Balada .
Baladeva1 = Bala Rāma, .
Baladeva2 .
. Vaiśampāyana said Baladeva first proceeded to Prabhāsa, where Uḍurāj, who had been affected with phthisis, became freed from his curse, whence its name. Asked by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related Prabhāsotpattikathana . Thence Bala Rāma proceeded to Camasodbheda, where he passed one night and gave away costly gifts. Thence he proceeded to Udapāna, and thence to Vinaśana, called so by the Ṛ. because the Sarasvatī has there become invisible from contempt of Śūdras and Ābhīras. Thence to Subhū mika, Gandharvāṇāṃ tīrtha, Gargasrotas thence to Śaṅkhatīrtha thence to the Dvaita lake then, along the southern bank of the Sarasvatī, to Nāgadhanvan . Baladeva then set out with his face towards the East, and one after another reached hundreds and thousands of tīrthas that occurred at every step. Bathing in all those tīrthas, and observing fasts, etc as directed by Ṛ and giving away wealth in profusion, etc he set out for that spot where the Sarasvatī turns in an eastward direction in order to behold the Ṛ. in the forest of Naimiṣa, and he became filled with wonder. There, at Kurukṣetra, O foremost one of Kurus race, thou perform great sacrifices and rites. Thence Bala Rāma went to the tīrtha Saptasārasvata, resorted to by Vāneyas and other ascetics, where the great ascetic crowned with success performed his penances . Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related the history of Saptasārasvata and Maṅkaṇaka . Having passed one night there, Bala Rāma went to Auśanasa tīrtha Kapālamocana the great muni Mahodara, whose thigh had been seized by the head of a Rā. slain by Rāma, was liberated. There Kāvya had performed tapas, and the whole science of politics and morals was revealed to him, while meditating on the war of Dai. and Dā. Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related the story of Mahodara . Thence Bala Rāma went to the abode of Ruṣaṅgu, where Ārṣṭiṣeṇa had formerly undergone austere penances, and where the great muni Viśvāmitra had become a brahman. Then to that tīrtha where Brahmán had created the worlds where the great Ṛ. Ārṣṭiṣeṇa had acquired brahman hood where the Ṛ. ṛ. Sindhudvīpa, the great ascetic Devāpi, and the muni Viśvā mitra had obtained brahmanhood . Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related the history of Ārṣṭiṣeṇa and of Viśvāmitra . Thence to the abode of Baka, where Dālbhya Baka had practised austerities which resounded with the chanting of the Vedas, where the Ṛ. Baka Dālbhya poured the king of Dhṛtarāṣṭra Vaicitravīryi as a libation into the sacrificial fire. In that tīrtha Bṛhaspati also poured libations into the sacrificial fire, by means of flesh, in order to destroy the Asuras, and the As. began to waste away and were destroyed by the gods. Thence to Yāyāta tīrtha, where, at a sacrifice of king Yayāti Nāhuṣa, the Sarasvatī produced milk and clarified butter, whereafter Yayāti went to heaven. Once again Yayāti performed a sacrifice there, and Sarasvatī gave to each of the brahmans everything for which he cherished a wish they regarded the gifts as made to them by the king, and praised and blessed him . and G. were pleased. Thence Baladeva proceeded to the tīrtha Vasiṣṭhāpavāha . Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana told the history of Vasiṣṭhāpavāha, and why it is so rapid, and the brahmanicide of Indra, who was purified by bathing in that tīrtha. Thence Baladeva went to the tīrtha of Soma where in days of yore Soma had performed the Rājasūyā sacrifice, with Atri for his hotṛ, after which the great battle took place between . and Dā Dai and a Rā named Tāraka, in which Skanda slew Tāraka and obtained the command of the celestial forces in that tīrtha is a gigantic Aśvattha tree, under whose shade Kārttikeya always resides in person . Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related the investiture of Skanda . The tīrtha, where in days of yore Varuṇa, the lord of the waters, had been installed by the celestials, is named Taijasa. Having bathed in that tīrtha and aed Skanda, Bala Rāma gave gold, etc to the brahmans passing one night there, he became cheerful and happy . Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related the installation of Varuṇa in a former kalpa. Thence Baladeva proceeded to Agnitīrtha, where Agni, disappearing, became concealed in the Śamī wood, wherefore the gods repaired to Brahmán, and asked him to create fire. Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related the story of Agnitīrtha . Thence he went to Brahmayoni, where Brahmán had exercised his functions of creation in days of yore Brahmán, having bathed in that tīrtha with all the gods, created all the tīrthas for the gods, according to due rites. Thence to Kaubera tīrtha, where Ailavila having practised austerities, obtained the mastery of all treasures, and all kinds of wealth, etc came to him of their own accord. Rāma there beheld the excellent woods of Kubera. Thence Bala Rāma went to Badarapācana, where the fruits of every season are always to be found, and where many ascetics and Si. are dwelling. Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related the birth of Śrutāvatī . Then Baladeva proceeded to Indratīrtha . Thence to Rāmatīrtha, the resort of . and B. ṛ. Thence to Yamunātīrtha . Thence Baladeva, aned with garlands of wild flowers, proceeded to Ādityatīrtha, where also Ṛ. Asita Devala obtained great yoga powers . Thence Bala Rāma went to the tīrtha of Soma, where Soma had in former days performed the Rājasūya sacrifice, and where the great battle was fought about Tārā . Thence Bala Rāma proceeded to the tīrtha of the muni Sārasvata, where, during a drought of twelve years, Sārasvata in former days taught the Vedas to many brahmans. Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related the history of Sārasvata and of Dadhīca . Thence Bala Rāma proceeded to the tīrtha of the old maiden . Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśam pāyana related the story of the vṛddhakanyā . While there, Baladeva heard of the slaughter of Śalya. Having come out of the environs of Samantapancaka, he enquired of the Ṛ. what was the result of a visit to Kurukṣetra, which they told him . Having visited Kurukṣetra, Bala Rāma proceeded to a large and exceedingly beautiful hermitage, overgrown with madhūkas, etc and was told by Ṛ. Here Viṣṇu in days of yore undertook austere penances and performed duly all the eternal sacrifices. Here a brāhmaṇī girl, having from youth observed the vow of brahmacarya, was crowned with success, and, in possession of yoga powers, she proceeded to heaven. The beautiful daughter of Śāṇḍilya, a brahmacāriṇī, who had performed penances difficult to women, went to heaven, and was worshipped by the gods and brahmans. Baladeva then began his ascent of Himavat, and soon came to the tīrtha Plakṣaprasravaṇa, and thence to the tīrtha Kārapavana, where he passed one night. the asylum of Mitra and Varuṇa. From Kāra pavana that spot on the Yamunā where in days of yore Indra, Agni, and Aryaman had obtained great happiness. Then he sat n with Ṛ. and Si. in order to listen to their talk. There came Ṛ. Nārada, and, asked by Bala Rāma, he told him all that had happened to the Kurus, including the names of those chiefs that had fallen, and of those that were still alive, and asked him to go to the field to witness the mace encounter between Bhīma and Duryodhana, which was to take place that very day. Bala Rāma then bade farewell, and dismissed all those that had accompanied him to Dvārakā, and descended from Himavat and Plakṣaprasravaṇa, and sang a verse in praise of the Sarasvatī. Then he ascended a chariot with goodly steeds, and arrived on the field .
Bāladhi .
Bālagraha . b, .
Balāhaka1 .
Balāhaka2 .
Balāhaka3 .
Balahan = Śiva = Indra, .
Balahantṛ = Indra, .
Balāka . f, The hunter Balāka used to slay animals for the livelihood of his sons and wives, and thus he also supported his parents and others that depended upon him always speaking the truth and never harbouring malice. devoted to the duties of his own order. One having found no other animal, he slew a blind beast of prey while it was drinking water. A shower of flowers fell from the skies a celestial chariot took him to heaven, while Aps etc were singing. That beast of prey had by austerities obtained a boon, and had become the cause of the destruction of all creatures. For this reason he was made blind by Brahman.
Balākā .
Balākāśva .
Balākin .
Bālakrīḍanaka = Śiva .
Bālakrīḍanakapriya = Skanda, .
Balākṣa .
Balanāśana = Indra, .
Balandharā .
Balānīka .
Balanisūdana = Indra, .
Balānucaragupta = Śiva
Balapramathana = Śiva .
Bala Rāma .
Bālārkavarṇa = Śiva .
Bālarūpadhara = Śiva .
Bălarūpadhṛk = Śiva .
Bălasūdana = Indra, .
Balavardhana .
Balavat1 = Śiva . Do .
Balavīra = Śiva .
Balaviṣṭambha = Śiva .
Bala Vṛtra ghna = Indra, .
Bala Vṛtra han = Indra, .
Bala Vṛtra nisūdana = Indra, .
Bala Vṛtra sūdana = Indra, .
Balh, also Bahl .
Bālhi jāta .
Bālhĭka1 .
Bālhĭka2 .
Bālhīka3 .
Bālhĭka4 = Somadatta . Cf .
Bālhĭka5 . Bālhĭka3.
Bālhĭka6 . Bālhĭka3.
Bālhĭka7, a people v. Bāhīka v. Bālhĭka3, v. Bālhĭka3 v. Bālhĭka3 .
Bālhĭka8 .
Bālhĭka9 .
Bālhĭka puṅgava = Śalya .
Bālhikātmaja = Somadatta, .
Bālhīkī .
Bali1 . d, . b, .
Bali2 . BaliSudeṣṇāDīrghatamasśūdrā Aṅga. Vaṅga. Kaliṅga. Puṇḍra. Suhma Kākṣīvat sons
Bali3 .
. b One after having subjugated all As Indra asked Brahmán where Bali now was, he who was Vāyu, etc. . Brahmán said that Bali might now have taken his birth among camels or bulls, etc and be staying in a deserted house he told Indra not to slay him, but to ask him for instruction in morality. Indra roamed over the earth on Airāvata, and found Bali in a deserted house in the form of an ass. Indra scoffed at him, and asked if he did not grieve, and where his, Gandharvas had gone who in former days used to dance before him, and also about the garland given to him by Brahmán. Bali said When thou becomest like me, thou wilt not indulge in speech like this . Bali said that men, P G snakes, and Rā. were under his sway in days gone by, and that all creatures used to flatter him but he did not grieve at all in reality it is Time that creates and destroys all things, though living creatures brag of ng this or that this royal glory ...s not dwell long in one place she had dwelt in thousands of Indras before thee, who were very much superior to thee...knowing thee to be full of vanity, she will very soon desert thee . Indra saw Śrī, aned with head plumes, etc issue out of Bali, who did not know whether she was an As. damsel or a celestial one or a human one Indra asked her who she was, as she stood there like Māyā herself she said Virocana did not know me Bali s not know me the learned called me Duḥsahā etc. thou knowest me not, O Indra, nor s any one of the deities know me nor the Creator, nor the Ordainer rules over me it is Time that moves me from one place to another not disregard Bali. Bali has fallen off from truth, etc. formerly he was devoted to the brahmans, etc. but latterly he began to cherish feelings of animosity towards the brahmans and touched clarified butter with soiled hands therefore desert him and shall henceforth dwell in thee there is none among G As or Rā. that can keep me for ever. Requested by Indra, she told him how she might be able to reside in him permanently, dividing herself into four parts, according to the ordinance laid n in the Vedas one to be established on earth, one in the waters, one in Fire, one among the good, while Indra should continue to protect her. Bali said that when the Sun would shine only upon the region of Brahmán in the middle of Sumeru, then a great battle between the gods and the Asuras would again occur, and in that fight Bali would certainly vanquish them all. Indra said that Brahmán had commanded him never to kill him never will come the day when the Sun will shine only from the meridian Brahmán has before this laid n the laws that regulate the Suns motions... Bali proceeded towards the South Indra proceeded towards the North and ascended the skies . b Bhīṣma said After the battle between the gods and the Asuras, in which a large number of Dai. and Dā. fell, Bali became king. He was deceived by Viṣṇu, who once more established his sway over all the worlds. Indra was once more invested with the sovereignty of the gods, etc. the three worlds once more swelled with prosperity, and Brahmán became glad of heart. At that time Indra, accompanied by R Ā A . ṛ G Si etc seated on the four tusked Airāvata, made a progress through all the worlds. Once he saw Bali Vairocani within a certain mountain cave on the sea shore. Bali showed no signs of sorrow or agitation. Indra asked him how it was that he was so unmoved thou art bound with Varuṇas noose and hast been struck with my thunderbolt. Bali said What am now, thou wilt be in the future, explaining that only time rules the destiny of men that thou regardest thyself as the actor is the root of all sorrow in the course of time many thousands of Indras and of deities have been swept away yuga after yuga, and will be swept away in future.. just as Pṛthu, etc though they were devoted to the Vedas and Vedio rites, etc and though all of them were the offspring of Dakṣas daughters those, that are the measure of thy sway, will surely come to an end Ā R Sā and M. were all vanquished by me, etc. Indras panegyric on Bali. Indra left the spot and was praised by the M. ṛ. Fire once more began to bear the libations, etc. .
Balīha .
Balin = Śiva .
Balīna .
Balīvāka .
Bali Vāsava saṃvāda, v. before Balīhāḥ.
Ballava, the name which Bhīmasena Pāṇḍava gave himself when dwelling with king Virāṭa, .
Ballavāḥ, v. Mallavāḥ, a people.
Balotkaṭā . u, .
Bāṇa1 . u, . b, .
Bāṇa2 . u, .
Bāṇahasta = Śiva .
Bandhakartṛ = Śiva .
Bandhana = Śiva .
Bandhana Asurendrāṇāṃ = Śiva .
Bāndhava, Mapust.
Barbara, pl. .
Bārhadratha1 .
Bārhadratha2 .
Bārhaspata . .
Bārhaspatya .
Barhin1 .
Barhin2 .
Barhiṣad1 . b, .
Barhiṣad2 .
Barhiṣada, v. Barhiṣad2.
Bāṣkala .
Bhadra1 .
Bhadra2 .
Bhadrā, .
Bhadrā .
Bhadrā .
Bhadrā . j, .
Bhadrā = Subhadrā .
Bhadrā .
Bhadraśākha .
Bhadraśālavana, v. sāla.
Bhadrāśva . In Bh. is a large forest of bhadraśālas and a Huge tree kālāmra, which always has fruits and flowers, a yojana in height, aed by Si. and Cā. The men there are all white, with great energy and strength the women of the complexion of lilies, very beautiful, etc. they live, years. Drinking the juice of the kālāmra, they continue youthful for ever .
Bhadrakālī . b, .
Bhadrakālī . u, .
Bhadrakāra .
Bhadrakarṇeśvara .
Bhadrakṛt = Skanda, .
Bhadramanas .
Bhādrapadā .
Bhādrapada .
Bhadrasālavana . h, .
Bhadratuṅga .
Bhadravaṭa .
Bhaga1 . u, . d, . Bhaganetra, etc. Is often used to signify love, etc. .
Bhaga2 .
Bhaga3 = the Sun. b, .
Bhaga4 .
Bhagadā . u, .
Bhagadaivata .
Bhagadatta .
Bhagadattaja = Vajradatta, .
Bhagadattasuta = Vajradatta, .
Bhagadattātmaja = Vajradatta, .
Bhagaghna = Śiva, .
Bhagahan = Viṣṇu, .
Bhagahārin = Śiva, .
Bhāgakara = Śiva, .
Bhagākṣihan = Śiva, .
Bhaganandā . u, .
Bhaganetraghna = Śiva, .
Bhaganetrahan = Śiva, .
Bhaganetrahara = Śiva, .
Bhaganetranipātana = Śiva, .
Bhaganetrāṅkuśa = Śiva, .
Bhagavadbhakta .
Bhagavadgītā .
. Sañjaya informs Dhṛtarāṣṭra of Bhīṣmas fall in battle . Dhṛta rāṣṭras lament and inquiries . Sañjaya, praising Vyāsa for his yoga power, i.e. the celestial vision he had given him, began his discourse on the battle. Duryodhana gave Duḥśāsana instructions about the protection of Bhīṣma from Śikhaṇḍin . The two hosts arrayed at sunrise . Śakuni, etc stood each at the head of an akṣauhiṇī the under Bhīṣma stood in advance of the whole army. The Sṛñjayas, headed by Dhṛṣṭadyumna, looked like small animals beholding a lion . On that day Soma approached the region of the Pitṛs. Omens. Every morning Bhīṣma and Droṇa prayed for victory for the Pāṇḍavas, though they must fight for Dhṛtarāṣṭra according to their pledge Bhīṣma briefly addressed the Kuru army, mentioning Nābhaga, etc as examples. Karṇa, with his friends and relatives, laid aside his weapons owing to Bhīṣma. Description of the proceedings of the army, especially of Bhīṣma, etc. . Duḥśāsana, etc protected Bhīṣma from behind, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira told Arjuna, according to the words of the M. ṛ. Bṛhaspati, to array the troops in needle mouthed array. Arjuna said that he would make a Vajra array, which was designed by Indra they would all seek shelter with Bhīma. The leaders were Bhīmasena, etc. . Omens . When the sun rose the Kauravas stood facing the west, the Pāṇḍavas facing the east. Disposition of the two armies Duryodhana, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira sorrowfully addressed Arjuna, who consoled him with his truth, righteousness, etc which Nārada, Bhīṣma, and Droṇa knew, and which were a powerful aid towards victory according to Bráhmans words to Indra, etc on the occasion of the battle between the gods and the Asuras victory clings to Kṛṣṇa it was by choosing him that the gods under Indra had vanquished the Asuras . Disposition of the troops in the Pāṇḍava army Śikhaṇḍin, etc. . At Kṛṣṇas instance Arjuna recited a hymn to Durgā. Durgā appeared and gave him assurances of victory. Merits of this hymn . The combatants of both armies were cheerful, etc. . Before Droṇa, Duryodhana compared the combatants of the Pāṇḍava army Bhīma, etc with his own Droṇa, etc. . Kṛṣṇa, etc blew Pāñcajanya, etc. . Arjuna asked Kṛṣṇa to place his chariot between the two armies, so that he might see who were assembled to fight. Beholding his relatives, etc Arjuna was filled with compassion and overcome with despondency, and refused to fight . Kṛṣṇa appealed to Arjuna to shake off his despondency, but in vain. Kṛṣṇa then declared to Arjuna the nature and the attributes of the soul, and the folly of grieving for the dead, and exhorted him to comply with the duties of his order by fighting fairly, and to apply himself to work for works sake, and not for the sake of its results. Kṛṣṇa spoke of contemplation on the Sāṅkhyas and Yogins on devotion to work on his reiterated births on the best way on abanment of actions and application to actions he has the right view who considers Sāṅkhya and Yoga as one on the means of rising to devotion on Kṛṣṇa identified with Bráhman on the nature of Bráhman on Kṛṣṇa as the pervader of the whole universe, and as the enjoyer of all sacrifice on Kṛṣṇa as the source of the gods, etc. Arjuna believed what Kṛṣṇa said, and what also had been said by all the Ṛ and the . ṛ. Nārada, and Asita Devala and Vyāsa. Kṛṣṇa declared his divine perfections to Arjuna, and disclosed his supreme sovereign form he was praised by Arjuna he discoursed on the two kinds of worshippers on the body and the soul, etc the supreme object of knowledge on the three guṇas on the symbolical Aśvattha on godlike and demoniac natures and births on the threefold nature of faith on renunciation and abanment. Arjunas delusion is destroyed, and he once more takes up the Gāṇḍīva .
Bhagavadyāna i.e. Bhagavadyānaparvan.
Bhagavad yāna . Kṛṣṇa, after some time, desirous of beholding his father, left Khāṇḍavaprastha, having taken leave of Pṛthā, Subhadrā, Kṛṣṇā, and Dhaumya. The Pāṇḍavas, etc followed him half a yojana, Yudhiṣṭhira causing Dāruka to stand aside and, himself taking the reins, riding on Kṛṣṇas golden chariot with Garuḍa on the banner, and yoked with Śaivya and Sugrīva. Then he caused them to retire, and with Sāttvata and Dāruka reached Dvārakā, worshipped by Ugrasena, etc. and having embraced Pradyumna, Śāmba, Niśatha, Śārudeṣṇa, Gada, Aniruddha, and Bhānu, and having worshipped Āhuka and his old father and mother and Bala, he entered the dwelling of Rukmiṇī. Yudhiṣṭhira at Indraprastha sported with Draupadī, dismissing all his friends, brothers, and sons .
. Yudhiṣṭhira spoke to Kṛṣṇa about the mission of Sañjaya and the wickedness of Duryodhana and Dhṛtarāṣṭra though he was supported by the Kāśis, etc he asked for only five villages or towns, and complained of the cruel duties of the kṣattriya order. Kṛṣṇa said he was willing to go to the Kuru court in order to negotiate a peace, and Yudhiṣṭhira, after some hesitation, agreed to the proposal . Kṛṣṇa mentioned the offences of the Kauravas, and said that he thought war to be certain all the omens pointed in that direction therefore Yudhiṣṭhira should collect everything needed for battle . Bhīma told Kṛṣṇa to speak mildly and not threaten the Kurus with war. Just as, when Dharma became extinct, Kali was born in the race of the Asuras, who flourished with prosperity and blazed with energy, so was Udāvarta born among the Haihayas, etc. . These vile individuals sprang up, at the end of each yuga, in their respective races for the destruction of their kinsmen so has Duryodhana been born at the end of the yuga among us the Kurus. Yudhiṣṭhira and Arjuna too are averse from war . Kṛṣṇa scoffed at Bhīma for his unusual mildness, though he had sworn, as the sun journeyed around Meru, to slay Duryodhana with his mace . Bhīma mentioned his well known valour, and said that he was for bearing their injuries, only for fear lest the Bharata race might be extirpated . Kṛṣṇa explained that he had only spoken through affection . Arjuna told Kṛṣṇa to strive sincerely to bring about peace for he was able to whatever he would but if Kṛṣṇa deemed the destruction of the Kurus to be preferable, let it be effected soon he mentioned the offences of Duryodhana towards themselves and Draupadī. At all events, Kṛṣṇa best knew what was for their good . Kṛṣṇa said he would try to bring about what was beneficial to both the Pāṇḍavas and the Kurus to make peace was within his power he would all that could be e by human exertion, but he could not control destiny Duryodhana, etc would never make peace by giving up the king many a time he had tried to withdraw Kṛṣṇa from Arjuna about a year ago, on the occasion of attacking Virāṭas kine, Bhīṣma had solicited Duryodhana about this very peace . Nakula told Kṛṣṇa to act according to his own opinion, disregarding all he had heard. Their attachment for the king was now greater than ever, as nobody could encounter Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. . He should first speak mildly and then threaten Duryodhana. He did not bt that he would accomplish his object, for Vidura, etc would understand him . Sahadeva said that Kṛṣṇa ought to provoke a war, because of the insults to Draupadī. Sātyaki approved of this, and thus did all the heroes present . Kṛṣṇā approved of the words of Sahadeva and Sātyaki, mentioned weeping the injustice of the Dhārtarāṣṭras, and that they had refused to give even five villages, Avisthala, etc and was of opinion that there was no necessity for going thither in order to make peace. Kṛṣṇa consoled her Thou wilt soon see thy husbands slay their enemies, and crowned by prosperity . Arjuna once more besought Kṛṣṇa to try to make peace. On the next morning, at the Maitra hour, in the month of Kaumuda, under the constellation Revatī, at the season of dews, Autumn having departed, Kṛṣṇa caused Śinis grandson Sātyaki to prepare his chariot they yoked to it Śaibya, Sugrīva, Meghapuṣpa, and Balāhaka. Garuḍa came and perched on the flagstaff. And taking Sātyaki also upon it, he set out under auspicious omens Vasiṣṭha, etc and . ṛ. and B. ṛ. walked around him . Yudhiṣṭhira, etc followed him on the way, and told him to salute Kuntī, etc. . Arjuna said he was for peace, but if Duryodhana would not give them what they demanded, he would annihilate the Kṣattriya race. Bhīma uttered a terrible shout, so that the bowmen trembled in fear, and steeds and elephants were seen to void urine and fæces. When all the kings had desisted following him, Kṛṣṇa set out with Dāruka. On his way he met with some Ṛṣis, and Jamadagnis son, the friend of Brahmán, told him that the . ṛ brahmans, and R. ṛ who had witnessed the former feats of gods and Asuras, had come to see and hear the assemblage at Hāstinapura . Ten chariot warriors followed in Kṛṣṇas train, and foot soldiers and attendants by hundreds, carrying provisions in abundance. Sinister omens occurred over Hāstinapura but where Kṛṣṇa passed everything became auspicious. At Vṛkasthala he passed the night . Meanwhile Dhṛtarāṣṭra, having heard from his spies that Kṛṣṇa was coming, respect fully addressed Bhīṣma, etc and said to Duryodhana and his counsellors that Kṛṣṇa should be received with the greatest honour let pavilions be set up on the road, etc. Bhīṣma, etc approved of it, and Duryodhana made the arrangements. But Kṛṣṇa did not even glance at it . When Kṛṣṇa was staying at Vṛkasthala and intended to come to Hāstinapura the next morning, Dhṛtarāṣṭra spoke to Vidura about how he in tended to treat Kṛṣṇa in order to honour him . Vidura blamed Dhṛtarāṣṭra for his insincerity the right hospitality to be offered to Kṛṣṇa is to make peace with the Pāṇḍavas, and thou wilt not give them even five villages, and seekest only to separate Kṛṣṇa from the Pāṇḍavas . Duryodhana said that it was of no use to bestow wealth and honour upon Kṛṣṇa, as he could never be separated from the Pāṇḍavas, and he will only think that we are worshipping him out of fear. Bhīṣma advised them to as Kṛṣṇa would say. Duryodhana declared that he would imprison Kṛṣṇa. Dhṛtarāṣṭra and all his counsellors became deeply afflicted, especially as Kṛṣṇa came as an ambassa. Inflamed with rage, Bhīṣma rose and left the place . The next morning Kṛṣṇa rose at daybreak and arrived in Hāstinapura, and was solemnly received by all the Dhārtarāṣṭras, etc and the citizens . Having saluted Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc he went to the abode of Vidura . In the afternoon he visited Kuntī, who wept for her sons, comparing Yudhi ṣṭhira to Ambarīṣa, etc mentioning the feats of Bhīma sena, comparing Arjuna to Kārtavīrya, etc and also inquiring about Sahadeva and Nakula, and likewise about Draupadī, mentioning how she was dragged by Duḥśāsana, while Bāhlika, etc grieved but especially she praised Vidura. Full years have gone since Duryodhana first exiled my son. She mentioned the invisible voice on the night of Arjunas birth, and trusted to Dharma and the Creator and Kṛṣṇa. She asked Kṛṣṇa to tell her sons that she besought them to avenge themselves and Draupadī, as even death was better than a life gained by meanness. Kṛṣṇa consoled her, and then departed for Duryodhanas mansion . Kṛṣṇa entered Duryodhanas palace, where he also beheld Duḥśāsana, Karṇa, and Śakuni. Duryodhana asked him to dine at his house but Kṛṣṇa did not accept the invitation, because he hated the Pāṇḍavas, and went to Viduras abode, where Droṇa, etc came to him . Vidura warned Kṛṣṇa against Duryodhana, who would never make peace, because he trusted Bhīṣma, etc and distrusted Kṛṣṇa . Kṛṣṇa said that he knew Duryodhana but great would be the merit earned by him who liberates the whole earth from the noose of death and even if he should meet failure, the merit of that intended act would become his moreover, have come here in order that unrighteous, foolish, and inimical persons shall not afterwards be free to say that Kṛṣṇa made no attempt to restrain them from slaughtering one another, though he was competent to so. Then he laid himself n for sleep . In the morning Duryodhana and Śakūni came and invited him to go to the council where Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Bhīṣma, etc were present he rode thither in his chariot with Dāruka, putting on his gem Kaustubha, and being protected by the Vṛṣṇis, and he was followed by Vidura in his own chariot, and by Duryodhana and Śakuni in one chariot, and by Sātyaki and Kṛtavarman and the other chariot warriors of the Vṛṣṇi race in chariots and on steeds and elephants . Then he entered the court with Vidura and Sātyaki before him sat Karṇa and Duryodhana, behind him the Vṛṣṇis with Kṛtavarman. Bhīṣma, Droṇa, etc with Dhṛtarāṣṭra rose up in his honour, etc. He beheld the Ṛṣis staying in the skies with Nārada at their head, and caused Bhīṣma to offer them seats. Duḥśāsana gave a seat to Sātyaki, and Viviṃśati one to Kṛtavarman . Kṛṣṇa spoke of the just complaints and claims of the Pāṇḍavas, and said that with them as his allies Dhṛtarāṣṭra would become invincible, having Bhīṣma, etc. . Let not the peoples of the earth be exterminated If thou regainest thy natural disposition, the earth may continue to be peopled as now. All the kings there present highly applauded the words of Kṛṣṇa in their hearts, but none of them ventured to say anything in the presence of Duryodhana . Jāmadagnya then told Dambhodbhavopākhyāna . Great, indeed, was that feat of old achieved by Nara. Nārāyaṇa again became superior to Nara in consequence of many additional qualities. Therefore, O king, before such weapons as Kākudika, etc are placed on the string of the Gāṇḍīva, go thou to Dhanañjaya, laying aside thy pride These weapons have other names corresponding to the eight passions . Mātalīyopā khyāna . After Kaṇva had spoken, Kṛṣṇa, Bhīṣma, and Nārada in vain admonished Duryodhana. Nārada related the old story Gālavacarita, and The fall of Yayāti . Dhṛtarāṣṭra complained that Duryodhana never listened to his, etc words, and asked Kṛṣṇa to admonish him. Kṛṣṇa reminded Duryodhana of what was agreeable to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc and warned him against Duḥśāsana, etc. . Bhīṣma, etc could not fight against Bhīma and Arjuna, who had vanquished G Y As and Pn. at Khāṇḍavaprastha who encountered many at Virāṭas city, etc. . Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Vidura, and Dhṛtarāṣṭra recommended Duryodhana to follow the counsels of Kṛṣṇa . Bhīṣma and Droṇa warned Duryodhana against Kṛṣṇa, etc. . Duryodhana complained that Kṛṣṇa always censured him in the match of dice blame could not be attached to him. He quoted this saying of Mātaṅga, one should always keep himself erect... . Kṛṣṇa indignantly answered Duryodhana, men tioning his offences against the Pāṇḍavas, Vāraṇāvata, etc. . Duḥśāsana said to Duryodhana that the Kauravas would bind him, and Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and Dhṛtarāṣṭra would make Duryodhana, Karṇa, and Duḥśāsana over to the Pāṇḍavas. Disregarding Vidura, etc Duryodhana went out of the court in anger. Kṛṣṇa blamed them for not having forcibly seized and bound Duryodhana think the time has come for ng this he reminded them of how he had himself slain Kaṃsa, and then installed Ugrasena on the throne, for the benefit of all the Yādavas, Andhakas, and Vṛṣṇis and that when the gods and Asuras, etc were arrayed for battle Parameṣṭhin had commanded Dharma to bind the Daiteyas and the Dānavas and make them over to Varuṇa, who having bound them with Dharmas noose and also with his own, kept them within the depths of the ocean. In the same way they ought to bind Duryodhana, etc. . Dhṛtarāṣṭra caused Vidura to fetch Gāndhārī, who blamed Dhṛtarāṣṭra, because he had by his indulgence caused Duryodhana now to be the slave of delusion and incapable of being turned back she then caused Vidura to fetch Duryodhana, whom she rebuked severely and asked to obey the words of his well wishers Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc. Bhīṣma and Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Bāhlīka gave the Pāṇḍavas their share from fear of a disunion. If Bhīṣma, etc became enraged the population of the earth would be exterminated. The affection of Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and Kṛpa towards the Pāṇḍavas and the Dhārtarāṣṭras was equal it is never seen in this world that men acquire wealth by avarice . Disregarding the words of his mother, Duryodhana again went away in anger, and began to consult with Śakuni, and Duryodhana, etc resolved upon seizing Kṛṣṇa then the Pāṇḍavas with the Somakas would become depressed. Sātyaki knew it, caused Kṛtavarman to array the troops at the entrance of the court, and informed Kṛṣṇa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and Vidura, but laughed at the project. Vidura told Dhṛtarāṣṭra that the last hour of all his sons was at hand. Kṛṣṇa said to Dhṛtarāṣṭra that if his sons perpetrated such a deed Yudhiṣṭhiras object would be accomplished, for this very seizing them with all who follow them, can make them over to the Pāṇḍavas will not, however, commit any such censurable deed that can proceed only from wrath and a sinful understanding. Dhṛtarāṣṭra once more caused Vidura to fetch Duryodhana with his brothers, etc and rebuked them t thou not know Kṛṣṇa, who is incapable of being defeated in battle by men, G As and U. Vidura reminded Duryodhana that at the gates of Saubha the monkey Dvivida covered Kṛṣṇa with a shower of stones, but could not seize him nor could Naraka with all the Dānavas at Prāgjyotiṣa slaying Naraka, Kṛṣṇa brought away, damsels and married them all. In the city of Nirmocana, mighty Asuras failed to seize him with their nooses. He also mentioned Pūtanā Śakunī, etc. . Kṛṣṇa reminded Duryodhana that he was not alone, and from his body issued myriads of gods, etc. all the kings were terrified and closed their eyes, except Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Vidura, Sañjaya, and the Ṛṣis for Kṛṣṇa gave them celestial sight, etc. Then he went out with Sātyaki and Kṛtavarman. The Ṛṣis Nārada, etc vanished. He found Dāruka waiting with his chariot drawn by Śaibya, and Kṛtavarman, who had mounted his chariot. Dhṛtarāṣṭra excused himself, saying that he was powerless. Kṛṣṇa bade farewell to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc and set out, followed by Bhīṣma, etc to the abode of Kuntī . Kuntī asked him to admonish Yudhiṣṭhira to attend to the duties of his own order, and not contemplate virtue alone, citing Mucukunda . It is the king that creates the Kṛta, Tretā, or Dvāpara age if he creates the Kṛta age, he enjoys heaven exceedingly if he creates the Tretā, he enjoys heaven, but not exceedingly if he causes the Dvāpara age to set in, he enjoys heaven according to his due if he promotes the Kali age, he will reside in hell for countless years. That understanding according to which thou art now acting, is not in accordance with the intentions of Pāṇḍu, or myself, or thy grandsire, when we uttered blessings on thee before, etc. . In this connection is cited an old story . Vidulāputraśāsana . Kuntī asked Kṛṣṇa to remind Arjuna of the voice heard at his birth to Bhīma he should say that the time has come for that in view of which a kṣattriya lady brings forth a son Kṛṣṇā he should praise for her behaviour towards the Pāṇḍavas he should remind Nakula and Sahadeva, that they must not forgive the insults towards Draupadī, that was worse than the defeat at dice and the exile Arjuna should always tread in the path pointed out by Draupadī Bhīma and Arjuna are a pair of Yamas capable of slaying the very gods they should revenge the harsh words said by Duḥśāsana to Bhīma. Kṛṣṇa bade farewell to Bhīṣma, etc took Karṇa upon his chariot and set out with Sātyaki, deliberating with Karṇa for a long time. Then he dismissed Karṇa, and driven by Dāruka the steeds soon reached Upaplavya. The Kurus assembled and talked about Kṛṣṇa . Bhīṣma and Droṇa reminded Duryodhana of what Kuntī had said to Kṛṣṇa, and the exploits of Arjuna they recommended peace fearful omens appeared . Duryodhana was cheerless and silent. Bhīṣma complained. Droṇa said that his affection for Arjuna was greater than for Aśvatthāman Duryodhana ought to have followed the counsels of the elders Yudhiṣṭhira was invincible the Pāṇḍavas had procured wealth from Kuberas abode the periods of our lives have run out etc. . Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related the conversation between Kṛṣṇa and Karṇa . Kṛṣṇa disclosed to Karṇa that he was virtually the son of Pāṇḍu, and on the side of his father was related to the Pāṇḍavas, on the side of his mother to the Vṛṣṇis. He ought to come with him to the Pāṇḍavas, being the elder brother of Yudhiṣṭhira, and be installed as king by Dhaumya, etc Yudhiṣṭhira being his heir presumptive and ruling the king under him during the sixth period Draupadī also will come to thee let the Draviḍas, etc walk before thee . Karṇa admitted that he was virtually the son of Pāṇḍu, Kuntī having, while a maiden, born him to Sūrya and then abaned him. But the Sūta Adhiratha had taken him to his home from her affection for him Rādhās breasts were filled with milk that very and she held his urine and fæces how can one like us....deprive her of her piṇḍa Adhiratha regarded Karṇa as a son, and Karṇa regarded Adhiratha as a father he had caused all the rites of infancy to be performed on Karṇa according to the scriptures he had caused the name Vasuṣeṇa to be bestowed upon him by the brahmans when Karṇa attained to youth he married wives according to Adhirathas selection with them he had begotten sons and grandsons. Through Duryodhana he had enjoyed sovereignty for thirteen years. His many sacri fices had always been with Sūtas, as had also his family rites and marriage rites. It was only after having got hold of Karṇa that Duryodhana had decided upon war with the Pāṇḍavas, Karṇa having been chosen as the antagonist of Arjuna. Their discourse ought to be kept secret, lest Yudhi ṣṭhira should refuse to accept the king and if the empire becomes mine shall certainly make it over to Duryodhana only. He praised Yudhiṣṭhira, etc and the weapons of Arjuna, comparing the combat to a sacrifice and Bhīmas drinking the blood of Duḥśāsana to the Soma drinking, etc. . Kṛṣṇa said the victory of the Pāṇḍavas was very certain he described Arjunas banner, made by Bhaumana by celestial illusion his Aindra, Āgneya, and Māruta weapons, etc. then all signs of the Kṛta, Tretā, and Dvāpara ages will disappear. He forebade Bhīmasenas dancing, having quaffed the blood of Duḥśāsana, etc. . Returning hence, say to Bhīṣma, etc that the present month is a delightful one days hence it will be the day of the new moon, presided over by Indra let the battle commence then . Karṇa ascribed the approaching destruction to Śakuni, etc and mentioned diverse sinister visions of planets, etc and he had seen in a vision, foreboding victory, Yudhiṣṭhira, etc and the inverse respecting Bhīṣma, etc. . Karṇa embraced Kṛṣṇa, descended from his chariot, and riding in his own chariot, which was decked with gold, came back with us . Vidura approached Kuntī and spoke of the state and disposition of Yudhiṣṭhira, etc and the allies of Yudhiṣṭhira . Kuntī thought with grief on those who were going to fight . Especially she was afraid of Karṇa she recollected the boon of Durvāsas and its consequences . She went to Karṇa, who was standing performing his prayers on the bank of Gaṅgā with his face turned towards the east and his arms upraised and she stayed behind him, waiting for the completion of his prayers. Then, turning round, he beheld Kuntī . Kuntī disclosed to Karṇa his birth, mentioned the justice of the Pāṇḍava cause and the injustice of Duryodhanas, and besought him to join the Pāṇḍavas . Sūrya corroborated the words of Kuntī. But Karṇa represented to her the great injury she had e him he could not now frustrate the hope of the Kauravas but except Arjuna thy other sons shall not be slain by me. They then left the spot, turning into different directions . At Upaplavya Kṛṣṇa represented to the Pāṇḍavas all that had happened at Hāstinapura. In the night, Yudhi ṣṭhira again brought Kṛṣṇa into their midst, and caused him to repeat what had been said by Bhīṣma, etc. Bhīṣma had related his own life he mentioned a duel with Rāma, where Vicitravīrya fled, having been deserted by his subjects upon Vicitravīryas death anarchy prevailed in the king, and Indra did not give a drop of rain afflicted by hunger and maladies, the subjects then asked Bhīṣma in vain to ascend the throne when Pāṇḍu became king, his sons must obtain their paternal inheritance . Droṇa had related the life of Pāṇḍu. Vidura had asked Bhīṣma to go to the woods with him and Dhṛtarāṣṭra, or to bind Duryodhana and rule the king with the Pāṇḍavas. Gāndhārī proved that the king by right belonged to the Pāṇḍavas and their sons and grandsons, and to no others . Dhṛtarāṣṭra had repeated to Duryodhana the genealogy of the Kuru race from Soma, mentioning especially that Yayāti had placed his youngest son Pūru on the throne and that Devāpis installation was forbidden by the brahmans and all aged persons because of a skin disease, and as Bāhlika abaned his father and brother and obtained the wealthy king of his maternal uncle, Śāntanu, the youngest of the three brothers, became king. Being defective of a limb, was likewise excluded by Pāṇḍu at his death the king must pass to his sons ...thou art not the son of a king, and therefore hast no right to the king . Kṛṣṇa continued his relation Duryodhana had repeatedly instructed the kings, saying To day is Puṣya march ye. Eleven akṣauhiṇīs have been assembled headed by Bhīṣma .
Bhagavat is often applied to the names of persons of high merit, especially religious merit, or used to design them alone. The Most High, . Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu, Nārāyaṇa. Kṛṣṇa, . the Most High, Viṣṇu, Nārāyaṇa. Viṣṇu, . the Most High, Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa Nārāyaṇa, . the Most High, Kṛṣṇā, Viṣṇu. Brahmán, . Śiva, etc . Indra, . Agni, q.v. Kubera, . Dharma, . Nārada, . Kaṇva, . Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Bhāgavata . c, . b, .
Bhāgin = Śiva .
Bhagīratha Bh. caused the shore of Gaṅgā Bhāgīrathī to be covered by flights of steps made of gold he presented the brahmans with, of damsels decked with ornaments of gold, etc. . It is related how Gaṅgā became his daughter and then his son G. sang all this before Ṛ and men. At last he ascended to Brahmaloka through the grace of the brahmans . b, .
Bhagīratha sutā = Gaṅgā, .
Bhāgīrathī, .
Bhāgīrathī putra = Bhīṣma, .
Bhāgīrathī suta = Bhīṣma, .
Bhaima, bhīmākramakartāro Bhīmavaṃśajā vā Schol .
Bhaimaseni1 = Divodāsa, .
Bhaimaseni2 = Ghaṭotkaca, .
Bhaimi = Ghaṭotkaca, .
Bhaimī = Damayantī, .
Bhairava .
Bhaktānāṃ paramā gatiḥ = Śiva .
Bhaktavatsala1 = Mahāpuruṣa. Do. = Viṣṇu .
Bhallāṭa .
Bhāluki .
Bhāṇḍāyani .
Bhaṅga .
Bhaṅgakāra1 .
Bhaṅgakāra2 .
Bhāṅgāsuri = Ṛtuparṇa, .
Bhaṅgāsvana . b, .
. b . Bhīṣma said In days of yore lived R. ṛ. Bhaṅgāsvana, who, being childless, from desire of obtaining issue performed the Agniṣṭuta, that is disliked by Indra, but is approved of by men desirous of offspring, in order to purge themselves of their sins . He had sons. Indra began to look for an occasion against him. Once, on a hunting expedition, he was bewildered by Indra, and, afflicted with thirst, he plunged into a lake after having caused his horse to drink, and found himself changed into a woman. He took leave of his wives and children and retired to the woods, joined an ascetic and bore him sons, whom he took to his former children, and made them all enjoy the king as their joint property. Filled with rage, Indra, in the form of a brahman, repaired to Bhaṅgāsvanas capital, and, referring them to the example of the gods and the Asuras, caused the half brothers to slay each other. Then, in the form of a brahman, he came to the spot where Bhaṅgāsvana lived as an ascetic lady, afflicted with grief, and told him that he was Indra, and why he was angry, but was gratified and granted him a boon. He asked that those sons of his should revive that were born by him as a woman, because the affection entertained by a woman is much greater than that which is entertained by a man. Indra revived all his children, and told him to choose which ever sex he liked, that of woman or that of man. He chose to remain a woman, because in sexual intercourse the pleasure that women enjoy is always much greater than what is enjoyed by men. Indra proceeded to heaven .
Bhānu1 .
Bhānu2, .
Bhānu3 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Bhānu5 .
Bhānu6 .
Bhānu7 .
Bhānudeva .
Bhānumat1, .
Bhānumat2 .
Bhānumatī .
Bhānumatī .
Bhānusena .
Bhara .
Bhārabhṛt = Viṣṇu .
Bharadvāja1 . y, . aa, . b, . b, Ānuśāsan.Vītahavyop.āśramapadam sya priest of Divodāsajyeṣṭhaḥ putro BṛhaspateḥĀnuśāsan.vanquished the Vītahavyas and the AinasBisastainyop.ŚapathavidhiC. BhāĀnuśasan.sa Gautamaḥ the fifth of the seven Dhaneśvarasya guravaḥ, dwells in the Northamong the learned brahmans in the NorthGuruśiṣyasaṃvādaPrajāpatiau
Bharadvāja2 .
Bharadvāja3 .
Bhāradvāja1. b, . b, .
Bhāradvāja2 = Yavakrīta, .
Bhāradvāja3
Bhāradvāja4 = Droṇa, .
Bhāradvāja5 = Aśvatthāman, .
Bhāradvājaguru = Droṇa, .
Bhăradvājasuta = Droṇa, .
Bhāradvājasuta = Aśvatthāman, .
Bharadvājātmaja = Droṇa, .
Bhāradvājī .
Bharaṇī .
Bharata1 bis . With his three wives Bharata begat altogether nine sons, with whom he was not pleased, as they were not like him their mothers therefore became angry and slew them . Bharata then, per forming great sacrifices, obtained from Bharadvāja a son named Bhumanyu, who became his heir apparent When a child in the forest Bh. . bound the lions and checked the tigers, etc whence he was called Sarvadamana, and his mother forbade him to torture animals. He performed horse sacrifices on the banks of the Sarasvatī, and on the banks of the Gaṅgā then once more, horse sacrifices and Rājasūyas, etc etc. he gave, billions of kine of the purest gold to Kaṇva. The gods with Indra and brahmans set up his sacrificial stake . To brahmans he gave horses, elephants, etc . b cf BharataDauṣmantiṃ ŚākuntalaṃDauṣmantiḥKhaḍgotpattik.DauṣmantiḥViśvāmitrop.BhsyānvayeĀnuśāsanik.cakravartītriloke viśrutaṃ vīraṃ Bharatañ ca prakīrttayet gavāmayena yajñena yeneṣṭaṃ vai Kṛte yuge Rantidevaṃ mahādevaṃ kīrttayet paramadyutiṃcakravartīAśvamedhik.Dauṣmantiḥ ŚākuntalaḥSvargārohaṇap.
Bharata2 .
Bharata3 .
Bharata4, .
Bhārata1, .
Bhārata2, .
Bhārata3, tī, .
Bhārata4 = Abhimanyu Ārjuni, Arjuna Pāṇḍava, Bhīmasena Pāṇḍava, Bhīṣma Śāntanava, Śāntanu, Dhṛtarāṣṭra Vaicitravīrya, Duḥśāsana Dhārtarāṣṭra, Duryodhana Dhārtarāṣṭra, Janamejaya Pārikṣita, Nakula Pāṇḍava, Pāṇḍu Vaicitravīrya, Sagara, Vidura Vaicitravīrya, Yudhiṣṭhira Pāṇḍava Abhimanyu, . Arjuna, . Bhīmasena, . Bhīṣma, . Śāntanu, . Dhṛtarāṣṭra, . . Duḥśāsana, . Duryodhana, . Janamejaya, . Nakula, . Pāṇḍu, . Sagara, . Vidura, . Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Bhārata1, .
Bhārata1 = saṃgrāma, .
Bhārata2 .
Bhāratācārya1 = Droṇa, .
Bhāratācārya2 = Kṛpa, .
Bhāratācāryaputra = Aśvatthāman, .
Bharataśārdūla1 = Bhīmasena Pāṇḍava, Dhṛta rāṣṭra, Duryodhana Dhārtarāṣṭra, Janamejaya Pārikṣita, Yudhiṣṭhira Pāṇḍava Bhīmasena, . Dhṛtarāṣṭra, . Duryodhana, Janamejaya, . Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Bharataśārdūlau = Bhīmasena and Duryodhana, .
Bharataśreṣṭha1 = Arjuna Pāṇḍava, Bhīmasena Pāṇḍava, Bhīṣma Śāntanava, Dhṛtarāṣṭra Vaicitra vīrya, Duḥśāsana Dhārtarāṣṭra, Duryodhana Dhārta rāṣṭra, Janamejaya Pārikṣita, Nakula Pāṇḍava, Parikṣit, Yudhiṣṭhira Pānḍava Arjuna, . Bhīmasena, . Bhīṣma, . Dhṛtarāṣṭra, . Duḥśāsana, . Duryodhana, . Janamejaya, . Nakula, . Parikṣit, . Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Bhārataśreṣṭha = Arjuna Pāṇḍava, .
Bharataśreṣṭhāḥ = the Pāṇḍavāḥ, .
Bharataśreṣṭhāḥ = the Duryodhanists, .
Bharataśreṣṭhau = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Bhāratagoptṛ = Śāntanu, .
Bhāratāgrya = Arjuna Pāṇḍava, Duryodhana Dhārtarāṣṭra, Janamejaya Pārikṣita Arjuna, . Duryodhana, . Janamejaya, .
Bharatamukhya = Duryodhana Dhārtarāṣṭra, . Janamejaya Pārikṣita, .
Bhāratāpasada = Duḥśāsana Dhārtarāṣṭra, .
Bharatapravarha = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Bharatapravarhāḥ = Pāṇḍavāḥ, .
Bharatapravīra = Bhīmasena Pāṇḍava, .
Bhāratarājaputra = Hrīniṣeva Ugrāyudha, .
Bhāratarathaśreṣṭha = Arjuna Pāṇḍava, .
Bharatarṣabha1 = Arjuna Pāṇḍava, Bhīmasena Pāṇḍava, Bhīṣma Śāntanava, Śāntanu, Dhṛṣṭad yumna, Dhṛtarāṣṭra Vaicitravīrya, Droṇa, Duryo dhana Dhārtarāṣṭra, Janamejaya Pārikṣita, Nakula Pāṇḍava, Pāṇḍu Vaicitravīrya, Sahadeva Pāṇḍava, Vidura Vaicitravīrya, Vikarṇa Dhārtarāṣṭra, Yudhiṣṭhira Pāṇḍava Arjuna, . Bhīmasena, Bhīṣma, . Śāntanu, . Dhṛṣṭadyumna, . Dhṛtarāṣṭra, . Droṇa, . Duryodhana, . Janamejaya, . Nakula, . Pāṇḍu, . Sahadeva, . Vidura, . Vikarṇa, . Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Bharatarṣabhāḥ, .
Bharatarṣabhau = Bhīma and Duryodhana, .
Bharatasattama1 = Arjuna Pāṇḍava, Bhīṣma Śāntanava, Śāntanu, Dhṛtarāṣṭra Vaicitravīrya, Duryodhana Dhārtarāṣṭra, Janamejaya Pārikṣita, Pāṇḍu Vaicitravīrya, Sahadeva Pāṇḍava, Vikarṇa Dhārtarāṣṭra, Yudhiṣṭhira Pāṇḍava Arjuna, . Bhīṣma, . Śāntanu, . Dhṛtarāṣṭra, . Duryodhana, . Janamejaya, Pāṇḍu, . Sahadeva, . Vikarṇa, . Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Bhāratasattama = Duryodhana, .
Bharatasattamāḥ, .
Bharatasiṃha1 = Bhīṣma Śāntanava, . Do. = Pāṇḍu, .
Bhāratasiṃha = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Bharatavaṃśa, .
Bhāratavarṣa . Bhārata2.
Bharatī .
Bhāratī .
bhāratī, .
Bharga, pl. .
Bhārga, pl. .
Bhārgava1, pl .
Bhārgava2, pl a people in Bhāratavarṣa, .
Bhārgava1, adj .
Bhārgava2, .
Bhārgava3 = Aurva, .
Bhārgava4 = Cyavana, .
Bhārgava5 = Śaunaka, .
Bhārgava6 = Śiva, .
Bhārgava7 = Dadhīca, .
Bhārgava8 = Devaśarman, .
Bhārgava9 = Jamadagni, .
Bhārgava1 = Mārkaṇḍeya, .
Bhārgava1 = Paraśu Rāma, .
Bhārgava1 = Pramati, .
Bhārgava1 = Ṛcīka, .
Bhārgava1 = Uśanas or Śukra, .
Bhārgava1 = Utaṅka, .
Bhārgava1 = Vipula, .
Bhārgava1, the potter, .
Bhārgava1 = the planet Venus, .
Bhārgavaśreṣṭha = Paraśu Rāma, .
Bhārgavadāyāda = Uśanas, .
Bhārgavanandana1 = Jamadagni, . Do. = Paraśu Rāma, .
Bhārgavarṣabha = Ṛcīka, .
Bhārgavasattama = Mārkaṇḍeya, .
Bhārgavasattamāḥ, .
Bhārgavāstra, .
Bhārgavī = Devayānī, .
Bhārgavottama = Śaunaka, .
Bhartṛ = Viṣṇu .
Bhartṛṣṭhāna .
Bharukaccha .
Bhāruṇḍa . g, .
Bhāruṇḍasāman .
Bhāsa . g, .
Bhāṣya . b, .
Bhāsī . Do. .
Bhāskara1, .
Bhāskara2 = Śiva, .
Bhāskaradyuti = Viṣṇu .
Bhāskari .
Bhasmabhūta = Śiva, .
Bhasmāśaya = Śiva, .
Bhasmadigdhordhvaliṅga = Kṛṣṇa, .
Bhasmagoptṛ = Śiva, .
Bhasmaguṇṭhita = Śiva, .
Bhāsvara. u, .
Bhauma1 = Naraka, .
Bhauma2 = the planet Mars .
Bhauma3 . b, .
Bhaumana . h, .
Bhava1 .
Bhava2 = Śiva.
Bhāva1 = Śiva = Viṣṇu .
. b Bhīṣma said Uśanas became engaged in ng what was disagreeable to the gods for an adequate cause . Kubera, the chief of Y. and Rā is the lord of the treasury of Indra. Uśanas, by yoga, entered Kubera, and deprived him of his liberty and robbed him of all his wealth. Kubera repaired to Śiva, who prepared to slay Uśanas with his lance. Uśanas placed himself on the point of Śivas lance. Śiva bent the lance with his hand, whence it was called Pināka, and threw Uśanas into his mouth and swallowed him, and Uśanas began to wander there. Mahādeva entered the waters and remained there like an immovable stake of wood for millions of years. Then he rose from the mighty lake and Brahmán approached him. Śiva saw that Uśanas within his stomach had become greater in con sequence of those penances of his. He once more betook himself to yoga meditation. Uśanas, filled with anxiety, began to wander within his stomach, and to sing his praises but Rudra had stopped all his outlets at last he let him go out through his urethra. Thence he came to be called Śukra, and became unable to attain the central point of the firmament. Umā prevented Śiva from slaying him, and Uśanas became her son .
Bhavabhāvana = Śiva, .
Bhavadā . u, .
Bhavaghna = Śiva, .
Bhāvana1 = Skanda, .
Bhāvana2 = Śiva = Viṣṇu .
Bhāvinī . u, .
Bhaviṣya c, .
Bhavodbhava = Kṛṣṇa, .
Bhaya .
Bhayakṛt = Viṣṇu, .
Bhayanāśana = Viṣṇu, .
Bhayaṅkara1 . Do a Viśvadeva .
Bhayaṅkarī . u, .
Bhayāpaha = Viṣṇu, .
Bheḍī . u, .
Bherīsvanamahāsvanā . u, .
Bheṣaja = Viṣṇu, .
Bhettṛ = Śiva .
Bhikṣu = Śiva .
Bhikṣurūpa = Śiva .
Bhīma1 .
Bhīma2 . u, .
Bhīma3 . b, .
Bhīma4 = Viṣṇu .
Bhīma5 = Śiva .
Bhīma6 = Bhīmasena or Bhīma Pāṇḍava . c, Vāyu came to Kuntī riding upon a deer a celestial voice was also heard after the birth of Bh. he fell from the lap of his mother, who had been frightened by a tiger, and broke into fragments the rock on which he fell he was born on the same day as Duryodhana . a, Duryodhana and Bhīma became very skilled in the use of the mace, and were jealous of each other f . b, Vṛkodara received lessons in arms from Saṅkarṣaṇa, and became like to Dyumatsena himself in strength Bh. vanquished the Pañcālas, etc. the Dāśārṇa king Sudhanvan fought with Bh. without weapons, and was there fore appointed commander in chief by him the Cedi king Śiśupāla offered his king to Bh who dwelt with him for thirty nights . Bh. vanquished king Śreṇimat of the Kumāra country, etc and returned to Indraprastha . a, Bhīmasena followed Bhīṣma and Dhṛtarāṣṭra Bhīma had gone away looking at his arms, desiring to destroy his enemies . h, . j to Bhīmasenas chariot are yoked coursers endued with the speed of the wind and the splenr of the stars, . d, Bh.s standard was made of gold and showed the device of a lion f f f f . b, . also the following synonyms Acyutānuja, . Anilātmaja, . Arjunāgraja, . Arjunapūrvaja, . Ballava . Bhīmadhanvan, . Jaya, . Kaunteya, etc. . Kaurava, etc Kuruśārdūla, etc. . Mārutātmaja, . Māruti, . Pāṇḍava, etc. . Pārtha, etc. . Pavanātmaja, . Prabhañjanasuta, . Rākṣasakaṇṭaka, . Samīraṇasya sutaḥ, . Vāyuputra, . Vāyusuta, . Vṛkodara, .
Bhīma7, a Deva gandharva Mauneya .
Bhīma8 .
Bhīma9, an ancient king .
Bhīma1, Vidarbha king .
Bhīma1, one of the yajñamuṣaḥ devāḥ .
Bhīma1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Bhīmā .
Bhīmā, a river in Bhāratavarṣa .
Bhīmabala1, one of the yajñamuṣaḥ devāḥ .
Bhīmabala2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Bhīmaśara, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Bhīmadhanvan = Bhīmasena Pāṇḍava, .
Bhīmadundubhihāsa = Śiva, .
Bhīmāḥ .
Bhīmajānu .
Bhīmakadalīkhaṇḍapraveśa . There they dwelt for six nights. Suddenly a wind from the north east brought a celestial lotus of, petals, which Kṛṣṇā presented to Yudhiṣṭhira she sent Bhīma to bring others, in order to carry them to their hermitage in Kāmyaka. Bhīma proceeded along the slopes of the Gandhamādana the lions, etc fled invisible, the wives of Yakṣas and Gandharvas stared at him. After having bathed in a lake, he blew his shell and began to proceed into a plaintain wood, but was arrested by his brother the ape Hanumat, who for his good obstructed the way to heaven, saying that this was the path to the devaloka, impassable by mortals, save the way of siddhi . Hanumat said he was suffering from illness and could not rise but Bhīma would not leap over him, and could not remove his tail. Hanumad Bhīma saṃvāda .
Bhīmamukha = Śiva .
Bhīmanandinī = Damayantī, .
Bhīmaparākrama = Viṣṇu .
Bhīmapūrvaja = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Bhīmaputrikā = Damayantī, .
Bhīmaratha1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Bhīmaratha2 .
Bhīmarathī .
Bhīmasena1, v. Bhīma6.
Bhīmasena2 .
Bhīmasena3 .
Bhīmasena4 .
Bhīmasenarasapāna . The Pāṇḍavas were far superior in strength and skill to the Dhārtarāṣṭras, and Bhīma tormented the Dhārtarāṣṭras. Duryodhana then built a palace at Pramāṇakoṭi, on the banks of the Gaṅgā, in order to sport in the water there. There he invited the Pāṇḍavas and poured kālakūṭaka poison into the food of Bhīma, and when Bhīma had lost his senses, Duryodhana bound him and threw him into the water, where he sunk n to the dwelling of the Nāgas, who bit him, but could not penetrate his thick skin. The immovable kālakūṭaka poison was neutralised by the movable serpent poison. Bhīma awoke and began to crush the serpents, until Vāsuki came, and, informed by Āryaka that he was the daughters son of Āryakas daughters son, let him drink as much of their rasa as he could. He drank eight kuṇḍas, and then was laid on a bed . When the Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas had returned to Hāstinapura, Yudhiṣṭhira asked Kuntī if Bhīma had come home. Vidura consoled her. On the eighth day Bhīma awoke from his slumber, bathed in the holy waters, ate of the paramānna, etc and was placed by the Nāgas in the same gardens, whence he ran home. Yudhiṣṭhira ordered him to keep silence on this accident, and the Pāṇḍavas became very vigilant from this day . Duryodhana, Karṇa, and Śakuni had recourse to numerous other contrivances in order to kill the Pāṇḍavas, who, though knowing it, yet, in accordance with the advice of Vidura, suppressed their indignation. Seeing the princes passing their time in play, Dhṛtarāṣṭra appointed Gautama as their preceptor .
Bhīmasenasuta = Ghaṭotkace, .
Bhīmasenātmaja, i.e. Ghaṭotkaca, .
Bhīmasūnu =, .
Bhīmasuta =, .
Bhīmasutā = Damayantī.
Bhīmavega, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Bhīmavegarava .
Bhīmavikrama .
Bhīmavratadhara = Śiva .
Bhīṇī . u, .
Bhiṣaj = Viṣṇu .
Bhiṣajau = Aśvinau
Bhiṣajāvartta, .
Bhīṣma in like manner Bhīṣma, the son of Śāntanu, was born in the womb of Gaṅgā from the seed of the Vasus . b, b, b, b, a, . b, . . b, . Compare also the following synonyms Āpagāsuta, . Āpageya, q.v. Bhāgīrathīputra, . Bhāgīrathīsuta, . Bhārata, q.v. Bharataśreṣṭha, q.v. Bhāratāṇāṃ pitāmahaḥ, q.v. Bharatarṣabha, q.v. Bharatasattama, q.v. Bhīṣmaka, . Śāntanava, . Śāntanoḥ putraḥ = Bhīṣma, . Śāntanoḥ sutaḥ = Bhīṣma, . Śāntanūja = Bhīṣma, . Śāntanunandana = Bhīṣma, . Śāntanusuta = Bhīṣma, . Devavrata, the original name of Bhīṣma, . Gaṅgāsuta = Bhīṣma, . Gāṅgeya = Bhīṣma, . Jāhnavīputra = Bhīṣma, . Jāhnavisuta = Bhīṣma, . Kaurava, Kauravānāṃ dhurandharaḥ, Kauravānāṃ pitāmahaḥ, Kauravānām upaśrayaḥ, v. Kaurava. Kauravādhama. Kauravanandana. Kauravya. Kuruśārdūla. Kuruśreṣṭha. Kurūdvaha. Kurukulaśreṣṭha. Kurukulādhama. Kurukulodvaha. Kurumukhya. Kurūṇām abhayaṃkaraḥ v. Kuru, pl. Kurūṇāṃ śṛṅgaṃ v. Kuru, pl. Kurūṇām ṛṣabhaḥ v. Kuru, pl. Kurunandana. Kurupati. Kurupitāmaha. Kurupravira. Kurupuṅgava. Kururājarṣisattama. Kurusattama. Kurūttama. Kuruvaṃśaketu. Kuruvaraśreṣṭha. Kuruvṛddha. . Mahāvrata, Nadīja, . Pitāmaha, etc. Prapitāmaha, . Sāgaragāsuta, . Satyasandha, . Tāladhvaja, . Vasu, q.v.
Bhīṣma2 = Śiva .
Bhīṣma3 .
Bhīṣmābhiṣecana .
Bhīṣmahantṛ = Śikhaṇḍin, .
Bhīṣmaka1 = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Bhīṣmaka2 . c, . c, .
Bhīṣmakātmajā = Rukmiṇī, .
Bhīṣmanihantṛ = Śikhaṇḍin, .
Bhīṣmaparvan . c, .
Bhīṣma Satyavatī saṃvāda . Satyavatī in vain asked Bhīṣma to ascend the throne and marry the wis of Vicitravīrya, in order to propagate the race . Bhīṣma adduced the examples of Paraśu Rāma and of Dīrghatamas . Thus many kṣattriyas have sprung from the seed of brahmans. Vyāsa raised offspring in the wis of Vicitravīrya .
Bhīṣmasya Svargārohaṇika parva .
Bhīṣmavadha .
. Beholding Arjuna again taking up the Gāṇḍīva, the Pāṇḍavas and Somakas were filled with joy and blew their conches, etc. G P Si Cā and Ṛ. came with Indra in order to behold the fight. Putting off his coat of mail, etc Yudhiṣṭhira, followed by his brothers and Kṛṣṇa, proceeded on foot, with joined hands, to Bhīṣma, etc one after another, and asked their permission to fight. He also inquired about the means of vanquishing Bhīṣma and Droṇa, and as they said that they were invincible he asked them to indicate the means of killing them. They gave the permission, said they would pray for his victory, though they were bound by the wealth of the Kurus to fight for them. Bhīṣma said that his time of death had not yet come, he must come to see him once more. Droṇa said that if he did not give himself up to death and drop his weapons nobody would be able to slay him he would drop his arms if he heard something very disagreeable from someone whose speech was trustworthy. Kṛpa said he was incapable of being slain. Śalya renewed his promise to weaken the energy of Karṇa. When the Kauravas saw Yudhiṣṭhira, they contemned him, believing that he had come in terror. Kṛṣṇa endeavoured to bring Karṇa over to the Pāṇḍavas, as long as Bhīṣma was not slain, but in vain. Yudhiṣṭhira exclaimed, He who chooses us, him we will choose for our ally Yuyutsu went over to the Pāṇḍavas, and Yudhiṣṭhira said that the propagation of Dhṛtarāṣṭras lineage and his śrāddha oblations rested on him. The Mlecchas and Aryans wept for joy at the behaviour of the Pāṇḍavas, and blew their conches, etc. . THE FIRST DAYS ENCOUNTER Duḥśāsana advanced with his troops with Bhīṣma at their head, and the Pāṇḍavas headed by Bhīmasena, who roared fright fully. Duryodhana, etc attacked Bhīmasena. The Draupadeyas, etc rushed against the Dhārtarāṣṭras. The disciples of Droṇa always hit the mark . Bhīṣma attacked Arjuna Sātyaki attacked Kṛta varman Abhimanyu fought with Bṛhadbala Bhīma sena struggled with Duryodhana Duḥśāsana fought with Nakula Durmukha fought with Sahadeva Yudhiṣṭhira fought with the Madra king Dhṛṣṭadyumna attacked Droṇa Śaṅkha encountered Somadattas son Dhṛṣṭaketu encountered Bāhlīka, they looked like the planets Aṅgāraka and Budha Ghaṭotkaca encountered Alambuṣa Śikhaṇḍin encountered Aśvatthāman Virāṭa attacked Bhagadatta Kṛpa attacked the Kaikeya king Bṛhatkṣattra Drupada attacked the Sindhu king Jayadratha, they resembled the planets Śukra and Aṅgāraka Vikarṇa attacked Sutasoma Cekitāna, who sided with the Pāṇḍavas, attacked Suśarman Śakuni attacked Prati vindhya Śrutakarman attacked the Kāmboja king Sudakṣiṇa, and stood like the Maināka mountain Irāvat attacked Śrutāyus the two princes of Avanti, Vinda and Anuvinda, en countered Kuntibhoja with his son the Kekaya brothers encountered the five Gāndhāra princes Vīrabāhu encountered Uttara The Cedi king attacked Ulūka. Thousands of single combats took place. . ṛ Si and Cā. beheld the battle, which resembled the combat of . and As. . The Pāṇḍavas and the Kurus fought as if they were possessed by demons. The divisions of the Pāṇḍavas, approaching Bhīṣma, began to yield . After the greater part of the forenoon had worn out, Durmukha, etc began to protect Bhīṣma, who rushed upon the Cedis, etc. . Then Abhimanyu attacked Bhīṣma, Kṛtavarman, Śalya, Durmukha, and Kṛpa he was regarded as equal to Arjuna, and his bow sent forth a twang like that of the Gāṇḍīva he stood firm like the Maināka mountain. When Bhīṣmas standard fell n, Bhīma shouted. Bhīṣma used celestial weapons. In order to protect Abhimanyu, Virāṭa, etc attacked Bhīṣma, who wounded Dhṛṣṭa dyumna and Sātyaki, and they cut off the standard of Bhīma sena, who wounded Bhīṣma and Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman. Mounted on an elephant, Uttara attacked the Madra king Śalya, whose steeds were killed by the elephant Śalya, with a dart, deprived Uttara of his senses, and mounted the chariot of Kṛtavarman. Seeing his brother Uttara slain and Śalya staying with Kṛtavarman, Śveta attacked Śalya. The Kosala king Bṛhadbala, etc attacked Śveta in order to protect Śalya Śveta wounded Rukmaratha, who was borne away by his charioteer. Then Duryodhana, with Bhīṣma, etc attacked Śveta and rescued Śalya Bhīṣma shot at Abhimanyu, etc. . The Pāṇḍavas, with Śikhaṇḍin, desired to rescue the generalissimo Śveta and attacked Bhīṣma. The Kurus retreated from fear, and abaned Bhīṣma. Duryodhana averted Śveta from Bhīṣma, and was routed Śveta once more attacked Bhīṣma, whose standard he cut n then Bāhlīka, etc attacked Śveta in order to protect Bhīṣma, whose chariot Śveta reduced to ashes, with standard, etc. Śalya, etc rushed to Bhīṣmas rescue a voice in the skies admonished Bhīṣma to hasten the death of Śveta. Sātyaki, etc rushed to the rescue of Śveta. Bhīṣma, etc checked them. With a shaft endued with the force of the Brāhma weapon, seen by G P U and Rā Bhīṣma shot Śveta to death. The Pāṇḍavas lamented the Kurus rejoiced Duḥśāsana danced for joy. Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa withdrew the troops, the same did the Kurus . When Śveta had been slain, Virāṭas son Śaṅkha, on beholding Śalya standing with Kṛtavarman, attacked Śalya Bhīṣma attacked Śaṅkha Arjuna placed himself in front of Śaṅkha and attacked Bhīṣma Śalya, mace in hand, slew the steeds of Śaṅkha, who mounted Arjunas chariot. Bhīṣma with his arrows slaughtered the Pāñcāla hosts, etc abaned Arjuna, and attacked Drupada. The Pāṇḍavas were routed, the sun set, and the Pāṇḍavas withdrew their forces . Seeing Bhīṣmas prowess, Yudhiṣṭhira com plained before Kṛṣṇa, and spoke of retiring into the woods. Bhīma alone, he said, fought in accordance with kṣattriya duties Arjuna was indifferent. Kṛṣṇa consoled him, saying that he had got Sātyaki, etc and that Śikhaṇḍin was certainly the slayer of Bhīṣma. Yudhiṣṭhira then addressed Dhṛṣṭadyumna, saying that he himself and Bhīma, etc would follow him. Dhṛṣṭadyumna said that he had been appointed by Śambhu to slay Droṇa and to fight against Bhīṣma, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira recommended the array called Krauñcāruṇa, which Bṛhaspati had explained to Indra in days of old, when the gods and the Asuras fought, but which had never been seen before. When morning dawned, Dhṛṣṭadyumna placed Arjuna in the van of the army, and Drupada became the head, etc. . Seeing the Krauñca of the Pāṇḍavas, Duryodhana, approaching Bhīṣma, etc gladdened them all, saying that their army, which was protected by Bhīṣma, was immeasurable, while that of the Pāṇḍavas, protected by Bhīma, was measurable. The Saṃsthānas, etc should protect Bhīṣma. Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and the Dhārtarāṣṭras formed a mighty array. Bhīṣma was followed by Droṇa with the Kuntalas, etc. . Śakuni protected Droṇa. Followed by his brothers and the Aśvātakas, etc Duryodhana advanced against the Pāṇḍava host. Bhūriśravas, etc protected the left flank Somadatta, etc the right Aśvatthāman, etc were in the rear behind them Ketumat, etc. . Bhīṣma and the others blew their conches, etc. Kṛṣṇa, etc blew their conches . The Kurus and Pāṇḍavas marched against each other in order to renew the battle . SECOND DAY Duryodhana began the battle. Bhīṣma shot at Abhimanyu, etc. Arjuna told Kṛṣṇa to take his chariot before Bhīṣma protected by Bhīṣma, Droṇa, etc will slaughter the Pāñcālas. Only Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and Karṇa could encounter Arjuna. Bhīṣma was protected by Saindhava, etc. . Bhīṣma, etc struck Arjuna, who struck Bhīṣma, etc. . Sātyaki, etc surrounded Arjuna. The Pāñcāla prince and the Somakas attacked Droṇa. Bhīṣma fought with Arjuna, at the request of Duryodhana, who complained of the absence of Karṇa Aśvatthāman, etc stood for battle Bhīṣma wounded Kṛṣṇa G Cā and great Ṛ. said they would be invincible by all the worlds with As and G. See Continuation of the combat between Droṇa and Dhṛṣṭadyumna. Bhīma attacked Droṇa in order to aid Dhṛṣṭadyumna, whom he caused to be taken up on another chariot. Urged by Duryodhana, the Kaliṅga king rushed against Bhīma in order to protect Droṇa. Droṇa abaned Dhṛṣṭadyumna and encountered Virāṭa and Dru pada. Dhṛṣṭadyumna proceeded to support Yudhiṣṭhira. See Bhīmasena was supported by the Cedis the Kaliṅga king by Ketumat and Śrutāyus. The Cedis, etc attacked the Niṣādas. The Cedis left Bhīmasena and turned back the Kaliṅga king and his son Śakradeva fought with Bhīma, who slew Śakradeva with his mace. Bhīma attacked Bhānumat, and slew him with his sword, dividing him in the middle, and made a great slaughter of men and elephants. Beholding Śrutāyus at the head of the Kaliṅga troops, Bhīmasena attacked him, was wounded, and taken into his chariot by the charioteer Aśoka once more he fought with Śrutāyus, and slew him, and Satyadeva, and Satya, and Ketumat, and routed the Kaliṅgas. When, however, the Kaliṅgas were rallied again, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, with Śikhaṇḍin, Yudhi ṣṭhira, etc protected one of the wings of Bhīmasena there was nobody on earth, save Bhīma and Sātyaki, who was dearer to Dhṛṣṭadyumna than his very life they beheld Sātyaki at a distance and that son of Śini took up the wing of both Bhīma and Dhṛṣṭadyumna Bhīma caused a bloody river to flow there. Bhīṣma heard the cries, attacked Bhīma, and was attacked by Sātyaki, etc. . Bhīṣma jumped from his chariot, mace in hand, and was taken by Dhṛṣṭadyumna on his chariot. Sātyaki slew the charioteer of Bhīṣma, who was then carried away from the field of battle by his steeds. The Kaliṅgas were totally routed by Bhīma, who was praised by the Pāñcālas and Matsyas, himself embraced Dhṛṣṭadyumna, and was con gratulated by Sātyaki, who returned to his own chariot and began to slay the Kurus . When the forenoon of that day had passed away, Dhṛṣṭadyumna engaged in battle with Aśvatthāman, etc. he slew the steeds of Aśvatthāman, who got up on Śalyas car. Abhimanyu quickly came up and wounded Śalya, etc but was, in his turn, wounded by Aśvatthāman, etc. . Lakṣmaṇa attacked Abhimanyu. Duryodhana attacked Abhi manyu in order to aid Lakṣmaṇa. Arjuna engaged in battle with the Kurus, headed by Bhīṣma and Droṇa dust and Abhimanyus arrows produced complete darkness. The Kurus were routed. Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa blew their conches. Bhīṣma suggested to Droṇa that they should withdraw the troops, and as the sun set both armies were withdrawn . THIRD DAY Next morning Bhīṣma formed a Garuḍa array at its beak was Bhīṣma himself its eyes were formed by Droṇa and Kṛtavarman Aśvatthāman, etc were at its head Bhūriśravas, etc were placed in its neck at its back was Duryodhana and his followers Vinda, etc formed its tail the Magadhas, etc formed the right wing the Kārūṣas, etc were stationed in the left wing. Arjuna and Dhṛṣṭadyumna formed an array in the shape of a half moon, with Bhīmasena in the right horn, etc. next to Nīla Dhṛṣṭaketu, etc. in the middle was Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc. on the left horn was he who had Kṛṣṇa for his protector. Then the battle commenced . Arjuna fought with the Kauravas, who could not be broken, as they were protected by Droṇa and the Pāṇḍavas could not be broken, as they were protected by Arjuna and Bhīma. At last Bhīṣma, etc broke the ranks of the Pāṇḍavas. Bhīmasena, etc attacked the Kauravas and fought with Duryodhana, Bhīṣma, and Droṇa Abhimanyu and Sātyaki attacked Śakuni . Dā G Pś U and Rā. eulogized Arjuna. The Gāndhāras, with Śakuni, fought with Sātyaki and Abhimanyu, and destroyed the chariot of Sātyaki, who mounted Abhimanyus chariot. Droṇa and Bhīṣma attacked Yudhiṣṭhira, and were attacked by him and the sons of Mādrī. Bhīmasena and Ghaṭotkaca fought with Duryodhana, who was brought away by his charioteer, and his troops fled, pursued by Bhīma. Dhṛṣṭadyumna and Yudhiṣṭhira slew Droṇas and Bhīṣmas army, which fled and could not be checked by by Bhīṣma and Droṇa. Abhimanyu and Śaineya began to slaughter the army of Śakuni. Arjuna routed the Kaurava army, and its flight could not be checked by Bhīṣma and Droṇa, but was checked by Duryodhana, who blamed Bhīṣma, saying that he did not sincerely fight with the Pāṇḍavas, otherwise his troops could not have been routed while Bhīṣma, etc were alive had he known this unwillingness of Bhīṣma to fight, he would have consulted Karṇa. Bhīṣma said that the Pāṇḍavas were incapable of being vanquished by the very gods, including Indra, but he alone would check them to day . After the forenoon of that day had passed away, Bhīṣma attacked the Pāṇḍavas, and a dreadful battle ensued, in which the Pāṇḍavas were routed. Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna to strike Bhīṣma, reminding him of his vow to slay all the warriors of Dhṛtarāṣṭras son, headed by Bhīṣma and Droṇa. At the request of Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa drove the steeds to where Bhīṣma was, and the army of Yudhiṣṭhira rallied for battle. Arjuna and Bhīṣma fought Kṛṣṇa displayed great skill in driving the horses he and Arjuna were both wounded by Bhīṣma, and the Pāṇḍava army was routed Bhīṣma ordered Droṇa, etc to attack Arjuna. The grandson of Śini came to Arjunas rescue Kṛṣṇa applauded him, and, saying that he would slay Bhīṣma and Droṇa, etc he jumped n from the chariot with his discus Sudarśana in his hand, and rushed towards Bhīṣma, but was held back by Arjuna, who said that he would himself slay the Kurus he was then prevailed upon to mount the chariot once more, where he blew the Pāñcajanya, while arrows were shot from the Gāṇḍīva in all directions. Then Duryodhana, etc attacked Arjuna, who invoked the Māhendra weapon and checked the Kaurava host. Virāṭa, Drupada, etc approached. Arjuna caused a river of blood to flow there with Rākṣasas on its banks. Elated with victory, the Cedis, etc set up a loud shout. The Kurus, including Bhīṣma, etc got afraid of the Indra weapon, and withdrew their forces at sunset. The same did Arjuna. Among the Kurus there was a great uproar The Sauvīras, etc have all been slain by Arjuna, and he has vanquished Śrutāyus, etc. . THE FOURTH DAY When the night had passed away, Bhīṣma at the head of the army proceeded against the foe, surrounded by Droṇa, etc. . The array of the Pāṇḍavas was like that of the day before. Bhīṣma attacked Arjuna, and so did Droṇa, etc. Abhimanyu rushed out of the ranks and proceeded against all the foes, but Bhīṣma avoided Abhimanyu and fought against Arjuna himself . Aśvatthāman, etc fought with Abhimanyu. Urged by Duryodhana, the Trigartas, etc attacked Arjuna and Abhimanyu. Proceeding towards Arjuna, Dhṛṣṭa dyumna attacked the Madras, etc and slew Saṃyamanis son . Dhṛṣṭadyumna fought with Śalya. Abhimanyu attacked Śalya. Duryodhana, etc protected the chariot of Śalya. Bhīmasena, etc fought with them. Bhīmasena, with his mace, attacked Duryodhana, who advanced with the Magadha division, and placing the ruler of Magadha before himself, Bhīmasena jumped from his chariot and slew the elephants with his mace the Draupadeyas, etc protected Bhīmas rear Abhimanyu slew the Magadha king after having slain his elephant . Duryodhana commanded his entire army to slay Bhīmasena, who crushed them with his mace, without being abaned by Dhṛṣṭa dyumna, etc. . Bhīṣma attacked Bhīmasena. Sātyaki attacked Bhīṣma. Only the Rā. Alambuṣa fought with the grandson of Śini. Only Somadattas son Bhūriśravas was then of good cheer he attacked Sātyaki . Duryodhana and his brothers surrounded Somadattas son Bhīmasena encountered the Dhārtarāṣṭras, who were headed by Duryodhana Nandaka also attacked Bhīmasena, who addressed his charioteer Viśoka, that he should drive the steeds with care Duryodhana also wounded Viśoka Duryodhana struck Bhīmasena so that he swooned away. The Pāṇḍava army, headed by Abhi manyu, showered arrows on Duryodhana Bhīmasena regained consciousness and fought against Duryodhana and Śalya, who was borne away from the battle. Fourteen Dhārtarāṣṭras, viz. Senāpati, etc encountered Bhīma sena, who slew Senāpati, etc. the remaining six fled. Urged by Bhīṣma, the whole Dhārtarāṣṭra army attacked Bhīmasena the Prāgjyotiṣa king Bhagadatta, on a huge elephant, struck Bhīmasena, who fell in a swoon. Then the Rā. Ghaṭotkaca, by help of his illusive force, appeared riding on an Airāvata, followed by the other Dig nāgas, each with four tusks and mounted by Rākṣasas, and attacked Bhagadattas elephant. Bhīṣma urged Droṇa and Duryodhana to rescue Bhagadatta all the kings, headed by Droṇa, proceeded to aid Bhagadatta Yudhiṣṭhira, with the Pāñcālas and Pāṇḍavas, pursued them from behind Ghaṭotkaca uttered a flerce roar Bhīṣma, addressing Droṇa, caused the army to withdraw, and so did the Pāṇḍavas with Bhīmasena and Ghaṭotkaca. Duryodhana was afflicted with sorrow . Dhṛtarāṣṭra complained to Sañjaya, and asked what was the cause of the victory of the Pāṇḍavas. Sañjaya explained that victory sides with righteousness, and related how Duryodhana in the night had enquired of Bhīṣma, on whom the Pāṇḍavas were relying to vanquish Droṇa, etc. . Bhīṣma had related this ancient history In days of old all the gods and Ṛṣis were assembled by Brahmán upon Gandhamādana and when Brahmán, together with the Ṛṣis and gods, beheld an excellent chariot in the sky, he hymned Nārāyaṇa . ...Therefore take birth in the race of Yadu and slay the sons of Diti... Having created the divine Saṅkarṣaṇa out of thy own self by thyself, thou didst then, O Kṛṣṇa, create thyself as Pradyumna, born of thyself from Pradyumna thou didst then create Ani ruddha, who is known as the eternal Viṣṇu and it was Aniruddha who created me as Brahmán, the upholder of the Universe. Created out of Vāsudeva, have therefore been created by thee. Dividing thyself into portions, take birth among human beings, and slaughtering the Asuras there ...thou wilt again truly attain to Yoga... . Requested by R and G Brahmán explained to them who Nārāyaṇa is. Those Dai. and Dā. and Rā. who were slain in battle have been born among men. The old Ṛṣis Nara and Nārāyaṇa are Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa should never be disregarded as if he were a man. This was heard by Bhīṣma from Ṛṣis, etc. . Never go to war with Kṛṣṇa and the Pāṇḍavas on account of thy folly thou couldst not appre hend this regard thee, therefore, as a wicked Rākṣasa. Where Kṛṣṇa is, there is righteousness and victory is where righteousness is...It is Kṛṣṇa who always imparts an understanding endued with righteousness and strength in battle to the Pāṇḍavas, and who always protects them from danger...He it is who, towards the close of the Dvāpara yuga and the beginning of the Kali yuga, is hymned by Saṅkarṣaṇa according to the Sātvata ritual . Bhīṣma, on the authority of Mārkaṇḍeya, declared the origin and glory of Kṛṣṇa, his deeds and creations, to Duryodhana . Bhīṣma cited a hymn to Nārāyaṇa, uttered by Brahmán himself, and communicated in days of old by B. ṛ. and G. on earth. Brahmán, who quoted Nārada, etc hymned Nārāyaṇa as the god of S. etc. . FIFTH DAY After the night had passed away, Bhīṣma proceeded in a Makara array, the Pāṇḍavas in a Śyena array, in whose beak, etc was Bhīmasena, etc. . Bhīmasena, penetrating the Makara array through its mouth, attacked Bhīṣma the Pāṇḍavas were confounded. Then Arjuna attacked Bhīṣma. Duryodhana addressed Droṇa, who attacked Sātyaki . Bhīmasena attacked Droṇa in order to protect Sātyaki. Droṇa, etc attacked Bhīmasena. Abhimanyu and the Draupadeyas attacked the Kurus Śikhaṇḍin attacked Bhīṣma and Droṇa Bhīṣma avoided him. Urged by Duryodhana, Droṇa protected Bhīṣma Śikhaṇḍin avoided Droṇa. Duryodhana protected Bhīṣma, who was attacked by the Pāṇḍavas with Arjuna at their head . An awful carnage ensued. Duryodhana and the Kāliṅgas placed Bhīṣma at their head and attacked the Pāṇḍavas the Pāṇḍavas, supporting Bhīma, attacked Bhīṣma . Arjuna attacked Bhīṣma with the Gāṇḍīva the Kurus were afraid and seemed to melt away. Then, with steeds of the Kāmboja breed, the Kāliṅga king, etc surrounded Śakuni. Bhīṣma, etc fought with Arjuna, etc. Drupada, etc fought with Droṇa Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman attacked Dhṛṣṭadyumna . Arjuna encountered Droṇa, etc. . Sātyaki, etc attacked Śālva and the Kaikeyas. Dhṛṣṭaketu and Ghaṭotkaca attacked the chariot division of the Dhārtarāṣṭras. Bhīṣma checked Bhīmasena. Sātyaki attacked Bhīṣma, but had his charioteer slain. Bhīṣma slew the Pāṇḍava forces but the Pāñcālas and the Somakas again attacked Bhīṣma. Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc attacked Bhīṣma Bhīṣma, Droṇa, etc attacked the Pāṇḍavas . Virāṭa. Aśvatthāman. Duryodhana. Bhīṣma. Arjuna. Bhīmasena. Abhimanyu attacked Citrasena, etc. . Duryodhana attacked Abhimanyu, and so did Lakṣmaṇa, who had his steeds and charioteer slain, and was carried away by Kṛpa on his chariot. The Sṛñjayas fought with the Kurus with their fists Bhīṣma slew the troops of the Pāṇḍavas with his celestial weapons . Sātyaki slew innumerable foes with his arrows Duryodhana despatched, chariots against him, but he destroyed them all with his celestial weapons. Sātyaki Bhūriśravas Sātyakis combatants fled and abaned him ten sons of Yuyudhāna Bhūriśravas towards the afternoon Bhūriśravas slew them Sātyaki Bhūriśravas, each of them slew the others chariot steeds Bhīmasena took Sātyaki up on his own chariot, and Duryodhana Bhūriśravas on his. The Pāṇḍavas Bhīṣma Duryodhana urged, to slay Arjuna, who, however, slew them all. The Matsyas and Kekayas surrounded Arjuna and Abhimanyu. At sunset Bhīṣma caused the troops to be withdrawn, and so did the Pāṇḍavas and the Sṛñjayas . THE SIXTH DAY After the night had passed away, the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas once more set out for battle. Yudhiṣṭhira caused Dhṛṣṭadyumna to dispose the troops in the Makara array Drupada and Arjuna = head Sahadeva and Nakula = two eyes Bhīma sena = beak Abhimanyu, etc. = neck Virāṭa and Dhṛṣṭadyumna = back five Kekaya brothers = left wing Dhṛṣṭaketu and Cekitāna = right wing Kuntibhoja and Śatānīka = two feet Śikhaṇḍin, etc. = tail. Bhīṣma disposed his army in the form of a huge crane Droṇa = beak Aśvatthāman and Kṛpa = two eyes Kṛtavarman, etc. = head Śūrasena and Duryodhana = neck the Prāgjyotiṣa king, etc. = breast the Prasthala king Suśarman = left wing the Tuṣāras, etc. = right wing Śrutāyus, etc. = rear. The Pāṇḍava army was protected by Bhīmasena, etc. the Kaurava army by Bhīṣma, etc. . Bhīmasena Droṇa, who had his charioteer slain and then himself restrained his steeds. Slaughtered by Droṇa and Bhīṣma, the Sṛñjayas and Kekayas took to flight and so did the Kauravas, mangled by Bhīma and Arjuna . Dhṛtarāṣṭra recounted the excellency of the Kaurava army, protected by Droṇa, etc. . Neither men nor Ṛṣis of old ever beheld such an army. That it should yet be slaughtered, he thought was due only to fate Vidura had spoken well, but the wicked Duryodhana would not accept . Bhīmasena the younger brothers of Duryodhana Duḥśāsana, etc. Bhīma left his chariot and took up his mace. Dhṛṣṭadyumna proceeded towards Śakuni seeing Bhīmas empty chariot, he became afflicted, but was comforted by the words of Viśoka he took Bhīma, who was surrounded by foes on all sides, into his chariot. The Dhārtarāṣṭras Dhṛṣṭadyumna . Droṇa Drupada the Somakas were struck with fear. Droṇa, with the weapon Prajñā, neutralized the Pramohana weapon in order to rescue Dhṛta rāṣṭras sons. Yudhiṣṭhira sent the Kaikeyas, etc headed by Abhimanyu, arrayed in a Sūcīmukha, to help Bhīma and Dhṛṣṭadyumna Dhṛtarāṣṭras troops were quite helpless, like a lady in the streets. Dhṛṣṭadyumna, causing Bhīma to be taken into the chariot of the Kekaya king, attacked Droṇa, who slew his charioteer and steeds Dhṛṣṭadyumna ascended the chariot of Abhimanyu Droṇa broke the Pāṇḍava army . Duryodhana Bhīma Bhīma Citrasena, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira sent chariot warriors to follow Bhīmasena from behind seeing them, the Dhārtarāṣṭras abaned Bhīma. In the afternoon Duryodhana attacked Abhimanyu and Bhīma sena Abhimanyu Vikarṇa, who had his steeds slain and mounted on the chariot of Citrasena Abhimanyu Durjaya and Vikarṇa Duḥśāsana the five Kekaya brothers Draupadeyāḥ Duryodhana . Duryodhana Bhīmasena . The Sindhu king came to the rescue of Duryodhana Kṛpa caused Duryodhana to mount his own chariot Jayadratha Bhīmasena. Dhṛṣṭaketu, etc the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra Abhimanyu Vikarṇa Durmukha Śrutakarman Sutasoma took Śrutakarman into his own chariot Śrutakīrti Jayatseṅa Śatānīka Jayatsena Duṣkarṇa Śatānīka, who slew Duṣkarṇa Śatānīka was surrounded by foes. The five Kekaya brothers the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra Durmukha, etc. . About sunset Bhīṣma broke the ranks of the Pāṇḍavas and so did Yudhiṣṭhira, having smelt the heads of Dhṛṣṭadyumna and Bhīmasena . Duryodhana sought Bhīṣma in the night and gave expression to his grief at the success of the Pāṇḍavas Bhīṣma promised to his best, at which Duryodhana was delighted . THE SEVENTH DAY Bhīṣma said to Duryodhana that he himself, etc were all prepared to battle for his sake that the Pāṇḍavas could not be vanquished by the very gods including Indra, having Kṛṣṇa for their ally, etc. but that he would either vanquish them or be vanquished by them. He gave Duryodhana a herb of great efficacy for healing his wounds. At dawn Bhīṣma disposed his troops in a Maṇḍala array, protected by Bhīṣma, who was again protected by Citrasena, etc. Duryodhana looked like Śakra himself. Then the Dhārta rāṣṭras began to proceed, facing the west. Yudhiṣṭhira disposed his troops in a Vajra array. Droṇa the Matsya king Aśvatthāman Śikhaṇḍin Duryodhana Dhṛṣṭadyumna Nakula and Sahadeva the Madra king Vinda and Anuvinda Irāvat many kings Arjuna Bhīmasena Kṛtavarman Hārdikya Abhimanyu Citrasena, etc. Ghaṭotkaca the Prāgjyotiṣa king Alambuṣa Sātyaki Bhūriśravas Dhṛṣṭaketu Yudhiṣṭhira king Śrutāyus Cekitāna Kṛpa. Others proceeded against Bhīma, and thousands against Arjuna, among others the Trigarta king with his brothers. . ṛ G and U. wondered, beholding the two Kṛṣṇas . Arjuna invoked the Aindra weapon the foes fled, but were rescued by Bhīṣma . After Suśarman had ceased fighting, and the Kuru army had been routed by Arjuna, and Bhīṣma had proceeded against the chariot of Arjuna, Duryodhana exhorted the kings and Suśarman to protect Bhīṣma, who resembled the planet Śukra and was surrounded by the Trigartas. Droṇa the Matsya king, who mounted the chariot of Śaṅkha, who was slain by Droṇa Virāṭa fled. Śikhaṇḍin Aśvatthāman Śikhaṇḍin descended, fought first with a sword, then mounted Sālyakis chariot. Sātyaki Alambuṣa Sātyaki employed the Aindra weapon which he had obtained from Arjuna, and destroyed the creations of Alambuṣas illusive power Alambuṣa fled. Dhṛṣṭa dyumna Duryodhana, who was forced to descend, mounted Śakunis chariot. Kṛtavarman Bhīmasena Kṛtavarman went to the chariot of Vṛṣaka in the very sight of Śalya and Duryodhana . Dhṛtarāṣṭra spoke to Sañjaya about the cheerfulness of the Pāṇḍavas and the cheerlessness of the Kurus, which he thought was destiny. In the forenoon The two Avanti princes Irāvat Anuvinda mounted the chariot of Vinda the horses ran away with the chariot. Ghaṭotkava Bhaga datta G and Ṛ. came there except Ghaṭotkaca, the other Pāṇḍava warriors fled, but rallied. The Prāgjyotiṣa king Ghaṭotkaca, who fled. The ruler of the Madras the twins Nakula must mount the chariot of Sahadeva Śalya was borne away by his charioteer . When the sun reached the meridian Yudhiṣṭhira Śrutāyus G and Rā. trembled R. and . prayed for the peace of the world Śrutāyus fled, and the troops of Duryodhana turned away. Cekitāna Kṛpa Cekitāna was forced to descend and took up a mace, and then a sword Karakarṣa took Cekitāna into his chariot, and Śakuni took Kṛpa into his. Dhṛṣṭaketu Bhūriśravas Dhṛṣṭaketu mounted the chariot of Śatānīka. Citrasena, etc Abhimanyu, who did not slay them, remembering Bhīmas words. Arjuna caused Kṛṣṇa to direct the chariot against Bhīṣma Arjuna Suśarman many were slain by Arjuna. The Trigarta king and thirty two others attacked Arjuna, who slew sixty chariot warriors, and sped to kill Bhīṣma. The Trigarta king attacked Arjuna Śikhaṇḍin, etc came to his rescue Arjuna shot at them with the Gāṇḍīva. Duryodhana, with Jaya dratha, etc came to protect Bhīṣma against Arjuna, who, avoiding them, attacked Bhīṣma, as did also Yudhi ṣṭhira, etc avoiding the Madra king. Kṛpa, etc shot at the Pāṇḍavas. Śikhaṇḍin fled, but, rebuked by Yudhiṣṭhira, who reminded him of his oath, he again attacked Bhīṣma. Śalya Śikhaṇḍin, who employed the Vāruṇa weapon. Bhīmasena Jayadratha Citrasena Bhīmasena Citrasena mounted on Vikarṇas chariot. Bhīṣma Yudhiṣṭhira, who mounted Nakulas chariot. Yudhiṣṭhira urged the kings to slay Bhīṣma. Śikhaṇḍin Bhīṣma, who disregarded him, remembering that he had formerly been a wife the Sṛñjayas Bhīṣma. Dhṛṣṭadyumna and Sātyaki slaughter the Kuru army. Vinda and Anuvinda attacked Dhṛṣṭa dyumna, who mounted Sātyakis chariot. Yudhiṣṭhira attacked Vinda and Anuvinda, protected by Duryodhana. Arjuna fought against many foes. Droṇa began to consume the Pāñcālas like fire a heap of cotton. Duryodhana and his brothers surrounded Bhīṣma and fought against the Pāṇḍavas. At sunset Rā Pś etc were seen all around. At sunset Arjuna, Yudhiṣṭhira with his brothers, Bhīma sena, Duryodhana, Droṇa, etc proceeded to their tents . THE EIGHTH DAY Having passed the night, the Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas once more proceeded to battle. Duryodhana, etc formed the array, having Bhīṣma with the Mālavas, etc in the van next to him was Droṇa with the Pulindas, etc. next to Droṇa was Bhagadatta with the Magadhas, etc. behind him was the Kośala king Bṛhadbala with the Melakas, etc. next to him the Prasthala king Traigarta, etc. next to the Trigarta king was Aśvatthāman next to him Duryodhana with the whole army and his brothers behind him Kṛpa. Urged by Yudhiṣṭhira, Dhṛṣṭadyumna formed a Śṛṅgāṭaka array Bhīmasena and Sātyaki, etc. = the horns next to them Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. = the centre Abhimanyu, etc. = rear. Description of the battle. Bhīṣma Dhṛṣṭadyumna . Yudhiṣṭhira Bhīṣma. Bhīmasena Bhīṣma, who was protected by Duryodhana and his brothers the steeds ran away with Bhīṣma Bhīmasena slew eight sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra Sunābha, etc. . Then the other sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra all fled away. Duryodhana urged his brothers to kill Bhīma. They remembered the words of Vidura. Duryodhana blamed Bhīṣma, who reminded him of the words of Droṇa, etc. . Dhṛtarāṣṭra complained to Sañjaya that his sons, though assisted by Droṇa, etc were still slain What can be the reason save fate He regretted that the wicked Duryodhana had not obeyed Bhīṣma, etc. . Sañjaya said that Dhṛtarāṣṭra ought to have restrained his sons from gambling. At noon the whole Pāṇḍava army, at the command of Yudhiṣṭhira Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc. rushed against Bhīṣma alone. Arjuna, etc rushed against all the kings under the command of Duryodhana. A third body was formed of Abhimanyu, etc. . Droṇa slew the Somakas and Sṛñjayas Bhīmasena, principally the elephant division of the Kurus Nakula and Sahadeva, the cavalry the Pāṇḍavas were destroyed by Bhīṣma, etc. . Śakuni and Kṛtavarman Hārdikya attacked the Pāṇḍavas. With horses of the Kāmboja, etc breed Arjunas son Irāvat attacked the Kauravas, and with his steeds brought about great confusion in their cavalry. Śakuni his six brothers Gaja, etc Irāvat, who slew them except Vṛṣabha. Duryodhana urged Ṛṣyaśṛṅgas son the Rā. to slay Irāvat both of them had recourse to magic Nāgas came to the rescue of Irāvat, but were consumed by a phantom in the form of Garuḍa then Irāvat became confounded and was slain by . Arjuna, etc slew many. Both armies fought as if they were all possessed by Rākṣasas and demons . Ghaṭotkaca, etc Duryodhana the Vaṅga king with, elephants Duryo dhana slew four Rā. Vegavat, etc. Ghaṭotkaca threatened Duryodhana with revenge for the exile of the Pāṇḍavas, etc. the Vaṅga king, mounted on his elephant, placed himself between Ghaṭotkaca and Duryodhana Ghaṭotkaca slew the elephant. Bhīṣma sent Droṇa, etc to the rescue of Duryodhana . Bhīma, urged by Yudhiṣṭhira, came to the rescue of Ghaṭotkaca, with Satyadhṛti, etc. . The Kurus left Ghaṭotkaca and fled . Duryodhana Bhīmasena, who was wounded Abhimanyu, etc Duryodhana urged by Droṇa, Somadatta, etc attacked the Pāṇḍavas Droṇa Bhīma Nīla Aśvatthāman Aśvatthāman Ghaṭotkaca many other Rā. Droṇa Rā. Ghaṭotkaca confounded Aśvatthāman by magic the Kurus and Droṇa, etc seemed to fly, etc. then, towards sunset, the Kuru troops fled, notwithstanding the words of Sañjaya and Bhīṣma . Duryodhana complained to Bhīṣma that he had not himself been able to slay Ghaṭotkaca. Bhīṣma said Duryodhana should always battle with Yudhiṣṭhira, etc while Bhīṣma, etc would battle against Ghaṭotkaca or Bhagadatta should fight against Ghaṭotkaca. Urged by Bhīma, Bhagadatta, on his elephant Supratīka, set out against the foes. Bhagadatta Bhīmasena, etc. . Bhagadatta the five Kekaya princes, etc. wounded by the Prāgjyotiṣa king, the elephant of the Daśārṇa king fled Ghaṭotkaca Bhagadatta G and Munis wondered Bhagadatta wounded Viśoka Bhīma descended, taking up his mace Arjuna came Duryodhana sent a division Bhagadatta attacked Yudhiṣṭhira Bhagadatta the Pāñcālas, etc. Bhīma sena told Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna about the slaughter of Irāvat . Arjuna complained to Kṛṣṇa about Irāvats death, the killing of kinsmen, etc quoting Vidura, etc. In the afternoon Droṇa Dhṛtarāṣṭras sons Bhīmasena Bhīṣma, etc Arjuna Kṛtavarman Bāhlīka Sātyaki Ambastha Abhimanyu Bhīma felled Vyūḍhoraska, etc. . Then the other sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra fled. Ambastha got upon the chariot of Kṛtavarman. Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc battled with the Kurus. When dark set in, both parties withdrew their armies . Duryodhana consulted Śakuni, etc as to why Droṇa, etc did not resist the Pārthas. Karṇa asked Duryodhana to see Bhīṣma and solicit him to withdraw from the battle in order to permit Karṇa to fight the foe. Duryodhana set out for Bhīṣmas tent, and asked Bhīṣma to retire if he was not competent to slay the Pāṇḍavas, etc. . Bhīṣma spoke to Duryodhana about the invincibility of the Pāṇḍavas, mentioning the Khāṇḍava forest, etc and Kṛṣṇa he promised to display all his valour on the next day only Śikhaṇḍin who was really Śikhaṇḍinī he would not slay. Duryodhana told Duḥśāsana to let all their twenty two divisions protect Bhīṣma against Śikhaṇḍin, especially Śakuni, etc. . Thus they proceeded to battle. Yudhāmanyu protected Arjunas left wheel, Utta manjas his right wheel, and Arjuna protected Śikhaṇḍin. Arjuna told Dhṛṣṭadyumna to place Śikhaṇḍin before Bhīṣma he would himself be his protector . THE NINTH DAY Bhīṣma disposed his troops in a Sarvatobhadra array Kṛpa, etc in the van Droṇa, etc on the right wing Aśvatthāman, etc. = left wing Duryodhana, etc in the midst Alambuṣa and Śrutāyus in the rear. Yudhiṣṭhira, etc stood in the van then there were Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc. . The Kuru troops were headed by Bhīṣma, the Pāṇḍava troops by Bhīmasena . Description of the heroism of Abhimanyu, confounding Kṛpa, etc. . Duryodhana despatched Alambuṣa to slay Abhimanyu, while they, headed by Bhīṣma and Droṇa, would slay Arjuna. Alambuṣa Abhimanyu Alambuṣa slaughtered the Pāṇḍava host the Draupadeyas Alambuṣa . Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sañjaya what was e by Alambuṣa, etc. . Alambuṣa Abhimanyu, who defeated him. Bhīṣma Abhimanyu, who slaughtered the Kaurava army. Arjuna Bhīṣma Kṛpa Arjuna Sātyaki Kṛpa Sātyaki Aśvatthāman Droṇa Sātyaki Arjuna Droṇa Duryodhana despatched Suśarman to take up the wing of Droṇa the Trigarta king Arjuna . and Dā. were highly gratified Arjuna employed the Vāyavya weapon, Droṇa the Śaila weapon the Trigarta division turned away Duryodhana, etc surrounded Arjuna Bhagadatta, etc surrounded Bhīma Bhūriśravas, etc the twins Bhīṣma Yudhiṣṭhira Bhīmasena, with his mace, slaughtered the elephants. Duryodhanas troops fled . Bhīṣma the Somakas Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc Bhīṣma the Draupadeyas, etc Bhīṣma the Kuru army protected Bhīṣma, who slaughtered the Pāṇḍava army the combatants censured Duryodhana, who urged Bhīṣma, etc to fight . Arjuna slew all the followers of Suśarman Duryodhana Arjuna. At noon Sātyaki Kṛtavarman Drupada Droṇa Bhīmasena Bāhlīka Abhimanyu Citrasena, who mounted the chariot of Durmukha Droṇa Drupada, who retreated Bāhlīka mounted the chariot of Lakṣmaṇa Sātyaki Bhīṣma the Pāṇḍavas attacked Bhīṣma in order to rescue Sātyaki battle between them and the Kurus . At the request of Duryodhana, Duḥśāsana protected Bhīṣma. Śakuni checked Nakula, etc. . Duryodhana despatched, horsemen, who were checked by Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. . Duryodhana urged Śalya against Yudhiṣṭhira Śalya Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. Bhīma came to the rescue of Yudhiṣṭhira. When the sun was sinking, there commenced a fierce and terrible battle . Bhīṣma Bhīma, etc. . Droṇa Sātyaki . Bhīṣma the Sauvīras, etc. Bhīṣma, Cedis, etc who were slain. Kṛṣṇa urged Arjuna to slay Bhīṣma . Arjuna Bhīṣma. Kṛṣṇa left his chariot, and rushed at Bhīṣma, whip in hand, but was brought back by Arjuna . When the sun set, both parties withdrew their forces. The Pāṇḍavas, etc sat n for a consultation about Bhīṣma Kṛṣṇa said that Arjuna, etc were invincible, mentioning Arjunas words at Upaplavya . Yudhiṣṭhira proposed to go to Bhīṣma himself and ask him the means of his death. Kṛṣṇa approved of the proposal, and they went to the tent of Bhīṣma, who advised Arjuna to fight with him, placing Śikhaṇḍin before himself. Arjuna grieved at the prospect of striking Bhīṣma, but was reminded by Kṛṣṇa of his vow to slay Bhīṣma . The Pāṇḍavas and Kṛṣṇa went away with rejoicing hearts . THE TENTH DAY Towards sunrise the Pāṇḍava army went out for battle, placing Śikhaṇḍin in their van Bhīmasena and Arjuna became the protectors of his wheels in his rear were the Draupadeyas and Abhimanyu, protected by Sātyaki and Cekitāna behind them was Dhṛṣṭadyumna, protected by the Pāñcālas next to him was Yudhiṣṭhira with the twins next behind him Virāṭa next to him Drupada the five Kekaya brothers and Dhṛṣṭaketu protected the rear. At their head the Kurus had Bhīṣma, protected by Dhṛtarāṣṭras sons next behind them Droṇa and Aśvatthāman next behind was Bhagadatta with his elephant division behind him Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman behind them the Kāmboja king Sudakṣiṇa, etc. . The Pārthas with Arjuna at their head, placing Śikhaṇḍin in the van, proceeded against Bhīṣma. Bhīma, etc slew many. Bhīṣma Pāṇḍavas, etc. Bhīṣma Śikhaṇḍin Arjuna urged Śikhaṇḍin to slay Bhīṣma, while Arjuna would check Droṇa, etc. . Bhīṣma slew the Pāñcālas and the Pāṇḍava army. Arjuna slew the Kuru army. Duryodhana complained of Arjuna before Bhīṣma, and of Sātyaki, etc. . Bhīṣma said he would to day either be slain or slay the Pāṇḍavas, and he slew hundreds of thousands . Urged by Arjuna, Śikhaṇḍin, and so also Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc attacked Bhīṣma Citrasena Cekitāna Kṛtavarman Dhṛṣṭadyumna Somadattas son Bhīmasena Vikarṇa Nakula Kṛpa Sahadeva Durmukha Ghaṭotkaca Duryo dhana Sātyaki the Kāmboja king Sudakṣiṇa Abhimanyu Aśvatthāman Virāṭa Drupada Droṇa Yudhiṣṭhira Duḥśāsana Arjuna Śikhaṇḍin etc. Dhṛṣṭadyumna Bhīṣma Arjuna could not advance further than to the chariot of Duḥśāsana, who also shot at Kṛṣṇa Duḥśāsana for a moment sought refuge by Bhīṣma then he again attacked Arjuna Alambuṣa Sātyaki Bhagadatta Sātyaki Duryodhana Sātyaki the Kāmboja king Abhimanyu Śikhaṇḍin Bhīṣma Virāṭa Drupada Bhīṣma Aśvatthāman Virāṭa Drupada Kṛpa Sahadeva Vikarṇa Nakula Durmukha Ghaṭotkaca Kṛtavarman Dhṛṣṭadyumna Bhūriśravas Bhīmasena Droṇa Yudhiṣṭhira the Prabhadrakas began to tremble Citrasena Cekitāna Arjuna compelled Duḥśāsana to retire, and then crushed the Kuru troops Duḥśāsana again resisted him . Droṇa became cheerless upon beholding unfavourable omens mentioning Śikhaṇḍin and Yudhiṣṭhira, etc he urged Aśvatthāman to attack Śikhaṇḍin and Bhīmasena . Bhagadatta, etc. Bhīmasena, who was also attacked by Duryodhana Jayadratha mounted the chariot of Citrasena Viśoka was wounded by Śalya Arjuna came, placing Śikhaṇḍin before himself, and approached Bhīma. Then Duryodhana urged the Trigarta king Suśarman to slay Arjuna and Bhīmasena Suśarman Arjuna Bhīmasena Arjuna Śalya, etc. Jayadratha also attacked Bhīma so did also Śalya, who also shot at Kṛṣṇa Droṇa the Māgadha king Jayatsena Arjuna Bhīmasena Jayatsena was carried away by his steeds. Then Bhīṣma, etc Bhīmasena Arjuna Dhṛṣṭa dyumna Bhīṣma Śikhaṇḍin Bhīṣma Yudhiṣṭhira, etc Bhīṣma. A terrible battle ensued, mainly turning upon whether Bhīṣma should be victorious or vanquished . At Bhīṣmas own request Yudhiṣṭhira Arjuna, etc Bhīṣma, who gave up all desire of pro tecting his own life. Urged by Duryodhana, Droṇa, etc the Pārthas, especially Arjuna, etc. the grandson of Śini Aśvatthāman Dhṛṣṭaketu Paurava Yudhā manyu Duryodhana Virāṭa Jayadratha Yudhiṣṭhira Śalya Bhīmasena the elephant division Dhṛṣṭadyumna Droṇa Bṛhadbala Abhimanyu the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc Śikhaṇḍin Arjuna Abhimanyu Duryodhana Aśvatthāman Sātyaki Paurava Dhṛṣṭaketu Jayatsena carried Paurava away on his chariot, and Sahadeva carried away Dhṛṣṭaketu Citrasena Suśarman Abhimanyu Bṛhadbala Bhīmasena slaughtered the elephants Yudhiṣṭhira Śalya Jayadratha Virāṭa Droṇa Dhṛṣṭadyumna Arjuna Bhīṣma Bhagadatta Arjuna, who urged Śikhaṇḍin to slay Bhīṣma Bhagadatta Drupada Arjuna Bhīṣma the Kurus attacked Arjuna Śikhaṇḍin attacked Bhīṣma, Cedis, etc were slain by Bhīṣma, and so the Somakas no chariot warrior ventured to approach Bhīṣma except Arjuna and Śikhaṇḍin . Bhīṣma did not defend himself against Śikhaṇḍin, whom Arjuna urged to quickly slay Bhīṣma, who with his arrows only checked Arjuna and slew the Pāṇḍava warriors. Duḥśāsana Arjuna all the Pārthas Duḥśāsana was van quished by Arjuna the Videhas, etc. Arjuna, who consumed them all by means of celestial weapons Arjuna Duḥśāsana, etc who fled Bhīṣma Arjuna Śikhaṇḍin Bhīṣma, who withdrew the celestial weapon . Śalya, etc slaughtered the Pāṇḍava warriors Arjuna felled a great many Kurus. Dhṛtarāṣṭras sons the Pāṇḍavas the Somakas and Sṛñjayas Bhīṣma Bhīṣma slew, elephants, etc and seven Matsyas and Pāñcālas, and Śatānīka, etc. Kṛṣṇa urged Arjuna to slay Bhīṣma. The Pāñcāla king and Dhṛṣṭaketu, etc were afflicted by Bhīṣma and rescued by Arjuna Śikhaṇḍin, protected by Arjuna, rushed against Bhīṣma Arjuna slew all Bhīṣmas followers, and then rushed at himself Sātyaki, etc attacked Bhīṣma, who slew seven warriors of Dhṛṣṭadyumnas division . Continuation The extraordinary heroism of Bhīṣma he Sātyaki, etc. Arjuna Bhīṣma Droṇa, etc Arjuna Sātyaki, etc the Kauravas, in order to rescue Arjuna Arjuna Bhīṣma, who now wished his death, which was approved of by Ṛ. and etc. Bhīṣma said to Duḥśāsana that Arjuna was invincible, and that he himself could not be vanquished by Dā and Rā. Yudhiṣṭhira urged his troops against Bhīṣma Dhṛtarāṣṭras sons surrounded Bhīṣma, but fled for Arjuna the Sauvīras, etc abaned Bhīṣma. A little before sunset Bhīṣma fell n from his chariot with his head to the east there were heard celestial voices, etc. as the sun was in the southern solstice, Bhīṣma postponed his death Gaṅgā sent to him the great Ṛ. in form of swans inhabiting the Mānasa lake. The Kurus, headed by Kṛpa and Duryo dhana, sighed and wept the Pāṇḍavas and Sṛñjayas, etc uttered loud shouts. Ṛ. and P. applauded Bhīṣma, who had recourse to that Yoga which is taught in the great Upaniṣads . Dhṛtarāṣṭra, mentioning Bhīṣmas brahmacarya for the sake of his father, and that he had not been slain by Rāma Jāmadagnya, grieved that he had been slain by Śikhaṇḍin. Sañjaya related that Bhīṣma lay on his bed of arrows, without, however, touching the earth. Both the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas were despondent the welkin was enveloped with a gloom, etc. Ṛ Si and Cā. mentioned his brahmacarya for his fathers sake. The Pāṇḍavas blew their conches, and Bhīmasena sported in great glee. Duḥśāsana informed Droṇa, who fell n from his chariot, and then ordered the Kurus to desist from battle and so did the Pāṇḍavas. Then the kings of both armies all repaired to Bhīṣma. Bhīṣmas head hanging n, he asked a pillow he refused the soft pillows offered him, and asked Arjuna to give him a suitable pillow Arjuna supported his head with three arrows shot from the Gāṇḍīva and inspired with mantras Bhīṣma was highly gratified. He caused Duryodhana to dismiss the physicians he asked that a ditch should be dug around him, until the sun should proceed towards the direction occupied by Vaiśravaṇa, and told them to cease fighting. Stationing guards all around for his protection, the heroes repaired for rest in the evening. Kṛṣṇa congratulated Yudhiṣṭhira, that canst slay with thy eyes alone Yudhiṣṭhira ascribed the victory to Kṛṣṇa . THE ELEVENTH DAY After the night had passed away, maidens came to Bhīṣma and showered flowers upon him. The Pāṇḍavas and Kauravas assembled together like brothers around his body. Bhīṣma asked for water he refused the excellent viands and water offered him, and asked Arjuna to give him water Arjuna mounted his chariot, and from the Gāṇḍīva shot an arrow inspired with mantras and identified with the Pārjanya weapon, piercing therewith the earth, and there arose a jet of pure and cold water Bhīṣma praised Arjuna even Nārada spoke of thee as an ancient Ṛṣi he mentioned his alliance with Kṛṣṇa, and regretted that Duryodhana had not listened to the words of Bhīṣma, etc. . He said to Duryodhana that the weapons appertaining to Agni, etc were known only to Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa, and told him to make peace, as long as Yudhiṣṭhira, etc did not consume his troops let Yudhiṣṭhira go to Indraprastha. But Duryodhana would not accept his counsels . All the kings retired. Karṇa visited Bhīṣma in private. Bhīṣma told Karṇa that he was not the son of Rādhā, but of Kuntī that he knew from Nārada and Vyāsa sinfully didst thou come into the world therefore it is that thy heart has been such, and also because thou didst associate with the low he mentioned that, proceeding to the city of Kāśi, Karṇa alone, with his bow, had crushed the kings in battle in order to procure a bride for the Kuru king Jarāsandha could not become a match to Karṇa in fight. He adjured Karṇa to unite with his uterine brothers. Karṇa mentioned that Kuntī had abaned him, and his obligations to Duryodhana, etc. he would fight Arjuna and the Pāṇḍavas though they were protected by Kṛṣṇa. Bhīṣma gave permission to Karṇa to fight, making heaven his goal, and then dismissed him .
Bhīṣmotpatti . Gaṅgā agreed to become the wife of Śāntanu on the condition that she would leave him the moment he interfered with her or spoke an unkind word to her. They had eight children but seven of them were, as soon as they were born, thrown into the water by her. The eighth was rescued by Śāntanus interfering. But then Gaṅgā, telling him who she was, and that his sons were the eight Vasus who had been cursed by Vasiṣṭha, left him .
Bhogavat .
Bhogavatī .
Bhogavatī .
Bhogavatī .
Bhogavatī . u, .
Bhogin, pl .
Bhogipati . b, .
Bhoja, pl. .
Bhoja1 .
Bhoja2 = Bhīṣmaka .
Bhoja3 Mārtikāvata .
Bhoja4 = Kṛtavarman, .
Bhojā .
Bhojakaṭa . c, . d, .
Bhojana1 = Śiva .
Bhojana2 = Viṣṇu .
Bhojanagara .
Bhojarāja1, .
Bhojarāja2 = Ugrasena, .
Bhojarāja3 = Kaṃsa, .
Bhojarāja4 = Aṃśumat, .
Bhojarāja5 = Kṛtavarman .
Bhojarājanyavardhana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Bhojasutā = Kuntī, .
Bhoktṛ = Viṣṇu .
Bhrājiṣṇu = Viṣṇu .
Bhramara .
Bhṛgos tīrthaṃ. e, where Paraśurāma had regained his energy that had been taken away by Rāma Dāśarathi.
Bhṛgu1 . c, . u, . w, . hh, . b, . b
Bhṛgu2 . b, .
Bhṛgu3 = Cyavana. b, .
Bhṛgu, pl. . u, . e, . b, . f, .
. b The Primeval Being called Mānasa Mahat Con sciousness Space Water Fire and Wind Earth. The self born Mānasa created a lotus pregnant with Energy Brahmán all things, Brahmán = Ananta Agni and Soma are his eyes, etc. Bharadvāja asked Bhṛgu about the extent of the firmament. Bhṛgu explained that the firmament or Space is infinite, and is peopled with systems upon systems of self luminous bodies, etc. Bharadvāja asked why Brahmán is called the first born and not the Lotus whence he sprang. Bhṛgus answer The earth is that lotus, created to give rise to that form of Mānasa which became Brahmán Sumeru, reaching up to heaven, became its pericarp . Bharadvāja asked how Brahmán, residing within Meru, created all things. Bhṛgu said that Mānasa created by fiat of Will, first water, which is the life of all creatures earth, etc are transformations of water, and have been produced by the solidification of that element. Bharadvāja enquired after the manner and order of the creation of the several elements Bhṛgu explained that in very ancient times Br. r assembled together, felt this very bt, engaged in contemplation for, celestial years, and then heard a celestial voice saying Formerly there was only infinite Space... . Asked by Bharadvāja, Bhṛgu explained why only the five primal elements are called Bhūtas. Bharadvāja enquired why all the elements are not seen in the immobile objects. Bhṛgu explained how all objects consist of all the five primal elements, but in each the proportions are different as example he adduced the trees, which he showed to be not inanimate, etc. through the breath called Prāṇa living creatures are enabled to move through Vyāna they put forth strength for action Apāna moves nward Samāna resides within the heart through Udāna one eructates and is enabled to utter the seven original notes called Ṣadja, etc. . Asked by Bharadvāja, Bhṛgu explained how fire resides within a living body, and how wind moves the body Prāṇa, Samāna, Apāna, Udāna, Vyāna . Bharadvājas observations on life being worth little if that which is called life be due to the action of fire and wind only . Bhṛgus observations on the indestructibility of living creatures Bharadvājas objection Bhṛgus answer . Bharadvāja enquired on the true nature of life Bhṛgu explained that it is antarātman that inspires the body water the soul = Brahmán = kṣetrajña and paramátman respectively etc. There is no destruction of the living agent it is the body that is dissolved in death . Bhṛgu said Brahmán first created only some brahmans who were Prajāpatis then Truth, etc. then Dā G Dai As M. U Y Rā N Pś and men with their four divisions brahmans, kṣattriyas, vaiśyas, and śūdras etc. Bharadvāja was unwilling to admit any original distinction between the four castes Bhṛgu admitted that there is no original distinction between them all the world at first consisted of only brahmans how the different castes gradually rose those are not brahmans that are incapable of understanding that every created thing is the Supreme Brahmán they take birth as Pś Rā Pretas, and Mlecchas . What acts constitute a brahman, a kṣattriya, a vaiśya, a śūdra a śūdra may become a brahman by ating the characteristics of a brahman, and vice versa the duties that one should observe to become truly righteous the mind should be united with Prāṇa, and Prāṇa be held within Brahmán . Bhṛgu discoursed on the characteristics of Truth and Untruth happiness should always be sought upon what happiness depends Bharadvāja bted that happiness is the highest aim Bhṛgus discourse in explanation of Bharadvājas bt . Asked by Bharadvāja, Bhṛgu explained the consequences of gifts, of righteousness, of conduct, of penances, of the study of the Vedas, and of Sacrifices. Asked by Bharadvāja, he then discoursed about the several kinds of duty then about the four modes of life and the duties of the several modes on the duties of the Forest mode of life on those of the Parivrājakas. Bharadvāja enquired about the existence of any region beyond that which we inhabit Bhṛgu indicated the existence in the North of a region that is the abode of the righteous Here Brahmán in days of yore, and all the gods with Ṛ having performed proper penances, became purified and attained to Brahmán. Bharadvāja worshipped Bhṛgu with veneration .
Bhṛgu śārdūla1 = Cyavana, .
Bhṛgu śārdūla2 = Śaunaka, .
Bhṛgu śārdūla3 = Jamadagni, .
Bhṛgu śārdūla4 = Paraśu Rāma, q.v.
Bhṛgu śārdūla5 = Ṛcīka, .
Bhṛgu śreṣṭha1 = Śukra, .
Bhṛgu śreṣṭha2 = Jamadagni, .
Bhṛgu śreṣṭha3 = Paraśu Rāma, q.v.
Bhṛgūdvaha1 = Bhṛgu. b, .
Bhṛgūdvaha2 = Cyavana, .
Bhṛgūdvaha3 = Śaunaka, .
Bhṛgūdvaha4 = Śukra, .
Bhṛgūdvaha5 = Paraśu Rāma, q.v.
Bhṛgūdvaha6 = Utaṅka, .
Bhṛgūdvaha7 = Vipula, .
Bhṛgukulaśreṣṭha1 = Mārkaṇḍeya, .
Bhṛgukulaśreṣṭha2 = Paraśu Rāma, .
Bhṛgukulakīrtivardhana = Cyavana, .
Bhṛgukulodvaha1 = Cyavana, .
Bhṛgukulodvaha2 = Śaunaka, .
Bhṛgukulodvaha3 = Śukra, .
Bhṛgukulodvaha4 = Paraśu Rāma, q.v.
Bhṛgukulodvaha5 = Utaṅka, .
Bhṛgumukhya = Cyavana, .
Bhṛgunandana1, .
Bhṛgunandana2 = Aurva, .
Bhṛgunandana3 = Cyavana, q.v.
Bhṛgunandana4 = Śaunaka, .
Bhṛgunandana5 = Mārkaṇḍeya, .
Bhṛgunandana6 = Paraśu Rāma, q.v.
Bhṛgunandana7 = Kuru, .
Bhṛgunandana8 = Ṛcīka, .
Bhṛgunandana9 = Uśanas, .
Bhṛgunandana1 = Utaṅka, .
Bhṛguputra = Ṛcīka, .
Bhṛgusattama1 = Paraśu Rāma, .
Bhṛgusattama2 = Ṛcīka, .
Bhṛgusattama3 = Vipula, .
Bhṛgusūnu, .
Bhṛgusuta = Ṛcīka, .
Bhṛgūttama1 = Jamadagni, .
Bhṛgūttama2 = Paraśu Rāma, .
Bhṛgūttama3 = Vipula, .
Bhṛgutuṅga .
Bhṛguvaṃśa .
Bhū = Śiva .
Bhū = Kṛṣṇa, .
Bhū = Viṣṇu .
Bhūśaya = Viṣṇu .
Bhūgarbha = Viṣṇu .
Bhujagapati = Padmanābha, .
Bhujagāri = Garuḍa, .
Bhujagātmajā = Ulūpī, .
Bhujagendrakanyā = Ulūpī, .
Bhujagottama = Viṣṇu .
Bhujagottamā = Ulūpī, .
Bhūliṅga. d, .
Bhumanyu1 .
Bhumanyu2 .
Bhūmanyu .
Bhūmi personified, etc.
Bhūmiśaya .
Bhūmiñjaya1 .
Bhūmiñjaya2 .
Bhūmipāla .
Bhūmiparvan . Dhṛtarāṣṭra wishes to hear about the extent of the ocean, of Śākadvīpa, etc. . Sañjaya describes the seven islands, the moon and the sun, and Rāhu. Jambu parvata extends for, yojanas. The extent of the salt ocean is twice this it has many kings, mountains, etc peopled by Si. and Cā and is circular in form. Then Śākadvīpa . In the North is the ocean of clarified butter then that of curds then that of wine then another of water. The extent of the islands is bled as they proceed further and further towards the North. In the island in the middle is the great mountain Gaura of red arsenic in the western the mountain Kṛṣṇa, the friend of Nārāyaṇa, where Keśava guards celestial gems and bestows happiness on creatures. The clump of Kuśa grass in Kuśa dvīpa and the Śālmali tree in Śālmalika are aed. In the Krauñca island also the mountain Mahā Krauñca is always aed by all four castes of men. There is the huge mountain Gomanta, whereon, with the emancipated, the puissant Nārāyaṇa Hari always resides. In Kuśadvīpa are six principal mountains the intervening spaces increase in the ratio of one to two as they proceed further and further towards the North and seven Varṣas, where . and G etc sport, and the inhabitants never die, and there are no robbers or Mlecchas all the residents are almost white and very delicate. In the Krauñca island are six mountains the intervening spaces increase in the ratio of one to two there are seven countries, inhabited by . and G. the people are almost white. In the island of Puṣkara is the mountain Puṣkara, with jewels and gems there Prajāpati always dwells, aed by . and M. ṛ. diverse gems from Jambu dvīpa are used there. In all these islands truth, etc increase in the ratio of one to two, as the islands become more and more remote. The land in all those islands comprises but one country, for that is said to be one country in which one religion is met with. Prajāpati always dwells there, protecting those islands. Cooked food comes there of itself. After these regions is seen Samā . Then he speaks of Svarbhānu, Candramas, Sūrya . have now told thee the construction of the universe according to the Śāstras. Therefore pacify thy son Duryodhana. Blessing upon the reader .
Bhūmipati, .
Bhūpati .
Bhūri . Kaurava.
Bhūribala .
Bhūriśravas . . b, . Compare also the following synonyms Bhūridakṣiṇa, . Śalāgraja, . Kaurava, q.v. Kauravadāyāda, q.v. Kauraveya, q.v. Kauravya, q.v. Kauravyamukhya, q.v. Kuruśārdūla, q.v. Kuruśreṣṭha, q.v. Kurūdvaha, q.v. Kurupuṅgava, q.v. Yūpaketana, . Yūpaketu, .
Bhūridakṣiṇa1 = Bhūriśravas, q.v.
Bhūridakṣiṇa2 = Viṣṇu .
Bhūridyumna1 .
Bhūridyumna2 .
Bhūridyumna3 .
Bhūridyumnapitṛ = Vīradyumna, .
Bhūrihan . b, .
Bhūritejas .
Bhūritejasa = Agni, q.v.
Bhūrloka .
Bhūṣaṇa = Viṣṇu
Bhūta = Śiva .
Bhūta, pl .
Bhūta, pl. masc .
Bhūtabhāvana1 = Śiva, .
Bhūtabhāvana2 = Viṣṇu .
Bhūta bhavya bhavan nātha = Viṣṇu .
Bhūta bhavya bhavat prabhu1 = Viṣṇu .
Bhūta bhavya bhavat prabhu2 = Śiva, .
Bhūta bhavya bhavodbhava = Śiva, .
Bhūta bhavyeśa = Indra, .
Bhūta bhṛt =Viṣṇu .
Bhūtacārin = Śiva .
Bhūtaśarman .
Bhūtadhāman .
Bhūtādhipati, .
Bhūtādi = Viṣṇu .
Bhūtādinidhana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Bhūtagrāma caturvidha = Śiva .
Bhūtakarman .
Bhūtakṛt1 = Brahmán, .
Bhūtakṛt2 = Śiva .
Bhūtakṛt3 = Viṣṇu .
Bhūtakṛt4 = Vasiṣṭha, .
Bhūtalaya = Śiva .
Bhūtamaheśvara = Viṣṇu, .
Bhūtānām īśvaraḥ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Bhūtānāṃ mathanaḥ u, .
Bhūtānāṃ patiḥ = Śiva, .
Bhūtaniṣevita = Śiva .
Bhūtāntarātman = Nārāyaṇa, .
Bhūtapati1, .
Bhūtapati2 = Śiva, .
Bhūtapati3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Bhūtātman1 = Śiva .
Bhūtātman2 = Viṣṇu .
Bhūtātman3 = Brahmán or Kṛṣṇa, etc .
Bhūtavāhanasārathi = Śiva .
Bhūtāvāsa = Viṣṇu .
Bhūteśa1 = Śiva, .
Bhūteśa2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Bhūteśa3 = Skanda, .
Bhūti = Viṣṇu .
Bhūtilaya .
Bhūtitīrthā . u, .
Bhuvabhartṛ, v. Āpa .
Bhuvas1 = Śiva .
Bhuvas2 = Viṣṇu .
Bhuvana1 .
Bhuvana2 .
Bhuvanabhartṛ, v. Agni.
Bhuvanaśreṣṭha = Viṣṇu, .
Bhuvaneśvara1 = Śiva, .
Bhuvaneśvara2 = Svayambhū, .
Bhuvaneśvara3 = Skanda, .
Bībhatsu, v. Arjuna.
Bījādhyakṣa, Bījakartṛ = Śiva .
Bījam avyayaṃ = Viṣṇu .
Bījavāhana = Śiva .
Bilvadaṇḍa = Śiva, .
Bilvaka1 .
Bilvaka2 .
Bilvapāṇḍara .
Bilvapattra .
Bilvatejas .
Bindu = Śiva .
Bindusaras . f, There king Bhagīratha, beholding Gaṅgā, resided for many years there innumerable sacrificial stakes made of gems and chaitya trees made of gold may be seen. There Indra reached perfection by sacrificing there Śiva, etc reside there Gaṅgā, issuing from Brahmaloka, first showed herself, and then divided herself into seven streams Vasvaukasārā, etc. .
. b Bhīṣma said The seven Ṛ. Kaśyapa, etc and Arundhatī together had one single maidservant, Gaṇḍā, who was married to the śūdra Paśusakha. While they, in days of old, practised penances, preparing themselves for Brahmaloka by yoga meditation, there occurred a severe drought Śibis son Śaibya had in former times given away a son of his as the sacrificial present to the ṛtvijes that prince now died of starvation impelled by hunger, the Ṛṣis cooked his body in a vessel. King Śaibya Vṛṣādarbhi came and offered to give them kine, etc but they refused it that acceptance of gifts from a king was poison they left the spot abaning that flesh. The king sent his ministers with figs, some of which were filled with gold but Atri, finding them heavy, refused to take them and so did all of them, and left the spot. Filled with wrath, Vṛṣādarbhi, after having observed penances, poured libations into the fire accompanied by mantras from the fire a hag sprang forth, whom he called Yātudhānī he ordered her to slay the Ṛṣis, etc having ascertained their names. While Ṛ. roved within the forest, subsisting upon fruits and roots, they saw a well nourished mendicant with a in good condition Arundhatī pointed him out to them, and each of them explained the superior condition of this mendicant with reference to one of the points in which he was better situated than they. The wandering mendicant approached them and touched their hand according to custom. One day they beheld a beautiful lake overgrown with lotuses, and desired to gather some lotus stalks urged by Vṛṣādarbhi, Yātu dhānī, who guarded the lake, would know their names before they took the stalks Atri knew that she stood there in order to slay them but they all told their names with their etymological explanations at each explanation Yātudhānī declared that she did not understand it, in consequence of the inflections which the roots had undergone Śunaḥsakha calls himself Śunaḥsakha sakhi, and as Yātudhānī wishes to hear the name once more in order to understand it, he struck her head with his triple stick, at which she was consumed to ashes. Having gathered lotus stalks, they once more plunged into the lake in order to offer oblations of water to the Pitṛs. As they came up, the stalks were nowhere to be seen. They took, each of them, oaths to their innocence but the oath of Śunaḥsakha was no oath at all, and he confessed that he had stolen the stalks from desire of testing them he turned out to be Indra, who had come to test them, and told them the whole matter about Yātudhānī. They then ascended to heaven in the company of Indra himself .
Bodha, pl a people .
Bodhya .
Bradhnaśva .
Brāhma, adj. . f, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . Brāhmya.
Brahmabhavana . b, . n, . Svayambhū bhavana.
Brahmabodhyā, a river .
Brahmacakra = Śiva, .
Brahmacārin1, a Gandharva .
Brahmacārin2 = Skanda, .
Brahmacārin3 = Śiva, .
Brahmaśālā, a river .
Brahmaśāpa .
Brahmaśiras, a celestial weapon . e B. destroys the entire universe at the end of the yuga. It is not known to Mahendra, nor to Yama, nor to the Yakṣa king, nor to Varuṇa, nor to Vāyu. By this Arjuna might obtain victory over Karṇa, Bhīṣma, Kṛpa, and Droṇa, and over Dānavas, Rākṣasas, Bhūtas, Piśācas, Gandharvas, and Pannagas when hurled with mantras it produced darts by thousands, maces and arrows. It might be hurled by the eye, by the mind, by words, and by the bow, . b, B. had sprung from the amṛta and came to Rudra in consequence of tapas. b Droṇa had given B. to Arjuna Aśvatthāman asked him for it, and Droṇa unwillingly gave him it. knowing his restlessness, with the command never to use it against men. Because of the bitter words of his father, Aśvatthāman began to wander over the earth in grief coming to Dvārakā he said to Kṛṣṇa that now he had B which Droṇa had obtained from Agastya after austere penances he asked Kṛṣṇa for his discus in exchange for that weapon. He was unable even to move the discus. Kṛṣṇa praised Arjuna and Pradyumna, etc who had never desired his discus, while Aśvatthāman confessed that he would have used it against Kṛṣṇa himself. Then he left Dvārakā, .
Brahmaśiropaharta = Śiva, .
Brahmadaṇḍa1, . Brahmaśapa.
Brahmadaṇḍa2 = Śiva, .
Brahmadaṇḍavinirmātṛ = Śiva .
Brahmadarśana. b, .
Brahmadatta1, an ancient king . b, . b, .
Brahmadatta2, pl. .
Brahmadatta Pūjanī Saṃvāda . b, As Bhīṣma had said that from trust great danger arose to kings Yudhiṣthira asked But how would the king maintain himself if he were not to trust anybody Bhīṣma related A bird named Pūjanī lived with king Brahmadatta in his palace at Kāmpilya like Jīvajīvaka, it could mimic the cries of all animals, etc. At one and the same time P. got an offspring and the king a son. P. used every day to go to the shores of the ocean and bring a couple of fruits, one for her own child and one for the prince. One day the prince, when playing with the offspring of P killed it, and then came back to his nurse. When P. had returned to the palace, she wept bitterly, and said that nobody should live with a kṣattriya or make friends with him for so long as it suits their purpose, they behave with courtesy but then they throw off the instrument they evil to all, and should never be trusted even after ng an injury they try to soothe. P. then pierced the eyes of the prince, saying that those who avenge an injury never lose their merit by such conduct. Thinking that the avenger only squares his account, Br. sought to prevail upon P. to remain even after a deadly injury, affection and mutual trust arise between two persons residing together animosity disappears quickly, like water poured upon the leaf of a lotus it is Time that s every act who therefore injures whom Like fire con suming the fuel, Time consumes all creatures what thou hast e, has been forgiven by me, thou also forgive me. P. maintained that the injurer ought to leave his old place and never to place his trust upon the injured just as the fragments of an earthen vessel cannot be reunited animosity destroys the very sons and grandsons, and thereby the parties lose the next world as well animosity can never die it lies hidden like fire in wood, or like the water fire in the ocean amongst men that have injured one another, therefore, mistrust alone can produce happiness nor should too much trust be placed upon a person deserving of trust one should try to inspire others with confidence in ones self, but never repose confidence in others the mind of a person who has once injured another becomes naturally filled with mistrust if he sees the injured person worshipping him with gifts and honours. Hostility springs from five causes woman, land, words, natural incompatibility, and injury if Time be the cause of all acts, why friends and kinsmen seek to avenge each other further, why did the gods and the Asuras, in days of yore, smite each other in battle and what use would there be of medicines and how could religious merit be acquired by persons performing religious acts Men wish for birds either for food or for sport. Misery arises from various sources
Brahmādhipa = Śiva, .
Brahmādistambaparyanta = Śiva, .
Brahmagarbha = Śiva .
Brahmāgrya = Mahāpuruṣa .
Brahmaguhā . b, .
Brahmahatyā = Brahmavadhyā, .
Brahmahṛdaya = Viṣṇu, .
Brahmaja = Skanda, .
Brahmajña1 = Skanda, .
Brahmajña2 = Viṣṇu .
Brahmakalpa1 . b, .
Brahmakalpa2, adj .
Brahmakanyā, .
Brahmakanyā .
Brahmakāya, pl a class of beings .
Brahmakāyika = Mahāpuruṣa .
Brahmakāyikam agnīnāṃ = Śiva .
Brahmakṛt1 = Śiva .
Brahmakṛt2 = Viṣṇu .
Brahmakṣetra . . g, .
Brahmalaukika .
Brahmaloka1 . . j, . j, . b, sc. DhṛtarāṣṭraPage1 b Rājadh.those who chastise the enemies of brahmans repair to B.Kṛtaghnop.Bhṛgu Bharadvājas.aṃ śrayatePrajāpati, etc attained to B.Mokṣadh.samyagvṛtti, i.e. brahmacarya leads to B.Śrī Vāsavas.nivāsibhiḥ, sc. ṛṣibhiḥMokṣadh.jīvayukto ratho divyo Be virājatev. Bráhmanācāryo Beśaḥ, Nīl. and the note of PCR.gatāś caiva...maharṣayaḥŚukakṛtyaUparicarasaśarīro gataś caiva Bṃ, sc. UparicaraNārāyaṇīyaBñ ca...Golokañ caB. is the lower lip of Nārāyaṇa, Goloka the upperĀnuśāsanik.Upamanyu Brahmalokaś ca lokānām ucyase, sc. ŚivaĀnuśāsanik.āvatāritaiḥ, sc. the names of Śivagatāḥ Siddhāḥgatāḥe vasanti, sc. gāvaḥBisastainyop.Ānuśāsanik.Yamasya sadane Bsame guṇaiḥordained for those who abstain from fleshMaitreyabhikṣāĀnuśāsanik.Umā Maheśvaras.Anugītāp.parāyaṇāḥNakulākhyānacārāḥḥ
Brahmaloka2, pl. .
Brahmaloka3 = Śiva, .
Brahmamaya, .
Brahmamedhyā, a river .
Brahmán1, masc the Creator . b, . j, . n, . u, . kk, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, bhūta sargaḥ kṛto Bṇāviśvaṃ sṛjat
Brahmán2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Bráhman . b, . b, . f, . b, . b, . . b, . b, . b, . b sc. Śukatejomayaḥ, i.e. ŚukaUparicarabṛhad Brahma mahac caiva śabdah paryāvavācakāḥ, etymology of the name Bṛhaspatibhāvam anusthitāḥNārāyaṇīyaparaṃ, i.e. NārāyaṇabhūtaṃAgniḥ = brāhmaṇa, Nīl.paramaṃ, i.e. nirvāṇatamaso Brahma sambhūtaṃVedā me Brahma cottaraṃ, said Brahmánagryaṃ, i.e. Nārāyaṇaparamakaṃ, i.e. NārāyaṇaUñchavṛttyup.vartayanāvartayāmī, i.e. the VedasĀnuśāsanik.yena prīṇāti upadhyāyaṃ tena syād Brahma pūjitaṃakṣaraṃ paramaṃ, identified with Śivanirguṇaṃ, i.e. Śivaṇo gatiṃ = Śivaparamaṃ, i.e. Civa= Śivaparaṃ = Śivasanātanaṃ = ŚivaPage1 b paramaṃ = Śivasanātanaṃ= Śivaparamaṃ = Śiva = paramaṃ, paraṃ= the Upaniṣads, PCR.ViśālābhūtāḥĀnuśāsanik.bhūyaṃ sa gacchatii.e. the VedasSuvarṇotpattiparaṃ, i.e. AgniKītopākhyānabhūtasya, i.e. VyāsabhūtaḥsanātanaṃUmā Maheśva rasaṃv.bhūyāya kalpatenirguṇaṃ nirmalaṃ Brahma yatra tiṣṭhati sa dvijaḥbhūyāya kalpateKṛṣṇa Vāsudevabhūtasya, i.e. Kṛṣṇabhūtaḥ, i.e. KṛṣṇaĀnuśā sanik.paramaṃ, i.e. Viṣṇusanātanaṃ yātitejomayāh, i.e. the ṛṣis of the Eastparamaṃmahad Brahma SāvitrīguṇakīrtanaṃsanātanaṃKṛṣṇa Vāsudevaguhāṃ praviṣṭaḥ, sc. KṛṣṇaAśvamedhikap.tryakṣaraṃ śāśvataṃmṛtyūAnugītāp.paraṃ= jīvaśāśvataṃ = jīvasanātanaṃ param āpnotiavyayam āpnotiāsadayati tad BBrāhmaṇa gītānirdvandvaṃsanātanaṃom ity akṣaraṃ Brahmaṇi sthitaḥ, Brahma bhūtaḥBrahmaiva samidhas tasya Brahmāgnir Brahma sambhavaḥ āpo Brahma gurur Brahma sa Brahmaṇi samāhitaḥvāri Bsambhavaḥlābhyasya nābhasya, PCR.ṇo liṅgaṃAnugītāp.paraṃGuruśiṣyasaṃv.paraṃbhūyāya kalpatebījaḥ, sc. vṛkṣaḥbhāvāyaśubhaṃ yātiprakā śatebhūyāya kalpateparam ...Brahmayonisthāḥbhūyāya kalpatevṛkṣaḥmayaṃ vṛkṣaṃ, vanaṃjnāḥ, C. has Brāparaṃtryakṣaraṃ...śāśvataṃśubhaṃ vettiPutradarśanap.opaniṣadaṃ, i.e. the Vedas and the UpaniṣadsSvargārohaṇap.bhūyāya kalpateMahābhārataparaṃ Brahmādhigacchati
Brāhman2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Brāhmaṇa1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Brāhmaṇa3 .
. b Kṛṣṇa said A certain brahmans wife asked her husband to what region she should go, being dependent on him as her husband, who was harsh in his conduct towards her . The brahman discourses on acts on the seat of the soul, where Bráhman, Soma, and Agni, etc dwell, and for whose sake Brahmán, etc in Yoga, worship the indestructible, etc. the life breaths prāṇa, etc. in the midst of them is Agni Vaiśvānara, whose seven flames are the nose, the tongue, the eye, the skin, the ear, the mind, and the understanding, etc. . In this connection an ancient story is cited, viz. that of the institution of the ten hotṛs, i.e. the ear, the skin, the two eyes, the tongue, the nose, the two feet, the two hands, the genital organ, the lower duct, and speech sound, etc are the ten libations the points of the compass, wind, sun, moon, earth, fire, Viṣṇu, Indra, Prajāpati, and Mitra are the ten fires, etc. in this connection an ancient story is cited, viz. that of the institution of the seven hotṛs, the nose, the eye, the tongue, the skin, the ear, the mind, and the understanding, not knowing the qualities of one another the nose, etc and the understanding never succeed in appre hending bt, it is the mind that apprehends it the nose, etc and the mind never succeed in apprehending determination it is the understanding alone that apprehends it in this connection this ancient narrative of a discourse between the senses and the mind is cited as the nose s not smell, etc without the mind, the mind thought itself to be the eternal and foremost one of all the elements but the senses said that without them the mind would have no enjoy ments at all, etc. likewise the ancient story of the institution of the five hotṛs Prāṇa, Apāna, Udāna, Samāna, and Vyāna the wind nursed by Prāṇa Apāna Vyāna Udāna Samāna these asked Brahmán in days of yore as to which of them was the foremost Brahmán said that he upon whose extinction all the life breaths become extinct is the foremost it turned out that they are all foremost and not foremost, as they possess the attributes of one another likewise the ancient story of the discourse between Nāraca and Ṛ. Devamata. Devamata said Which part of a creature that takes birth comes first into existence, is it Prāṇa or Āpāna, etc. Nārada seems to give the following explanation kāma is samāna and vyāna, which move trans versely and alternately and have sprung from sattva from kāma springs the vital seed and the rajas or blood from the union of these two springs prāṇa, and from the seed being modified by prāṇa springs apāna these two move up and n and represent the two libations in the fire from the sexual intercourse of the loving pair springs harṣa, which is udāna = the fire between prāṇa and apāna = the fire between day and night = the fire between sat and asat = Vyāna = Śānti = eternal Bráhman in fire the smoke is tamas, and the ashes rajas . likewise the ancient story of the Cāturhotra, i.e. the sacrifice with four hotṛs the instrument, the action, the agent, and emancipation at the sacrifice of yoga the Prāṇa is the Stotra, etc. people knowing Nārāyaṇa recite some Ṛcs to Nārāyaṇa animals were offered in days of yore and some Sāmans Nārāyaṇa is the soul of all there is one ruler, residing in the heart, etc. instructed by him the seven Ṛ.s shine in the firmament having lived with that instructor. Indra attained to the sovereignty of all the worlds. There is one enemy, residing in the heart instructed by him all snakes are always hated . In this con nection the old story of the instruction of the snakes, the gods, and Ṛ. by Prajāpati is cited asked by them what is highly beneficial, he said om, i.e. Bráhman in one syllable then they ran away in various directions from desire of self instruction first arose in the snakes the disposition of biting in the As. the disposition for ostentatious pride the gods betook themselves to gifts, and M. ṛ. to self restraint . The brahman compared the world to an impassable fastness, and Bráhman to a great forest asked by his wife, he described this forest copiously it is not, but nature that smells scents, etc. In this con nection an ancient discourse between an adhvaryu and a yati is recited Beholding an animal sprinkled with water at a sacrificial ceremony, a yati blamed the adhvaryu for that destruction of life. The Adhvaryu appealed to the Vedas, saying, This goat will not be destroyed, but will be benefited that part of it which is of earth will go to earth, etc. the yati said that if the sacrifice was to the benefit of the goat, then the goats ought to give their consent abstention from cruelty is alone worthy of approbation one should be guided by perception the adhvaryu objected that by smelling what belongs to the earth, etc one takes life, as all these entities have life the yati distinguished between the indestructible and the destructible of the soul of these only the indestructible is really existent to him who is freed from all existent objects there is no fear the adhvaryu admires and praises him, and says that he has no fault by performing those rites according to the mantras the yati remained silent the adhvaryu proceeded with the sacrifice . Follows the ancient story about the, armed king Kārtavīryārjuna and the Ocean v. Arjuna Kārtavīrya and Paraśu Rāma with Alarka . The brahman said There are three foes in the world exultation, satisfaction, and joy goodness desire, wrath, and hatred passion lassitude, sloth, and delusion darkness. Persons conversant with the ancient kalpas recite some verses which were sung in days of old by king Ambarīṣa, who had acquired a tranquil soul have killed all foes, etc but the greatest vice has not yet been destroyed by me... . Then the old narrative of the discourse between a brahman and king Janaka is cited . Asked by his wife as to how this knowledge may be acquired, the brahman said Know that Brāhmaṇī is the araṇī, the preceptor the upper araṇī penances and conversance with the scriptures turn the upper araṇī knowledge is the fire produced. Asked by his wife about the symbol of Bráhman called kṣetrajña, the brahman answered that he is without symbols and qualities. Kṛṣṇa said Then the mind of that brahmans wife, upon the destruction of the kṣetrajña, became that which is beyond the kṣetrajñas, in consequence of the knowledge of kṣetra. Asked by Arjuna, where now that brahman and his wife were, Kṛṣṇa said My mind is the brahman, my understanding is the brāhmaṇī he who has been called kṣetrajña is myself .
Brāhmaṇāḥ = Śiva .
Brahmaṇaḥ śāstra .
Brahmaṇaḥ kṣaya. kk, . Brahmakṣetra.
Brahmaṇaḥ pada . b, .
Brahmaṇaḥ sadana . ff, . b, .
Brahmaṇaḥ saras. gg, .
Brahmaṇaḥ sthāna . b, . b, . c, . b, .
Brāhmaṇa māhātmya kathana. Questioned by the Pāṇḍavas about the greatness of the brahmans, Mārkaṇḍeya told A prince of the Haihayas killed a brahman, whom he took for a deer, as he was enveloped in the skin of a black antelope. The Haihayas, very afflicted, set out inquiring as to whose son the muni might be. Arriving at the hermitage of Tārkṣya Ariṣṭanemi, they told him the matter, and learnt that it was his son, and that he had been revived, because these munis had no fear of death, as they spoke well of brahmans, etc. . Mārkaṇḍeya continued When the rājarṣi Vainya was per forming the horse sacrifice, Atri desired to go and ask him for alms, but gave up his desire of wealth and proposed to his wife and sons that they should all retire to the woods. His wife prevailed upon him that he should first acquire riches and distribute them to his sons and servants, and so he went to Vainya and praised him as the foremost of sovereigns and the ruler of their destinies . The ṛṣi Gautama blamed him for thus flattering the king, and said that it was Indra who was the foremost of sovereigns and ruler of their destinies . The munis applied to Sanatkumāra, who said that the brahmans and kṣattriyas ought to act together, and that the king might rightly be styled as Atri had e. Vainya then gave to Atri maidservants and millions of gold and ten bhāras of gold. Having given this to his sons Atri retired to the forest .
Brāhmaṇānāṃ netṛ = Skanda, .
Brāhmaṇapriya1 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Brāhmaṇapriya2 = Viṣṇu .
Brāhmaṇarūpa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Brāhmaṇasavratin = Skanda, .
Brahmaṇas tīrtha, a tīrtha .
Brāhmaṇa vyādha saṃvāda, v. Pativratopākhyāna.
Brāhmaṇī, a tīrtha .
Brāhmaṇī, a river .
Brahmanirmitaṃ saras .
Brahmaṇo bhavana = Brahmabhavana .
Brahmaṇo has . b, .
Brahmaṇo loka = Brahmaloka. ff, . b, . b, .
Brahmaṇya1 = Skanda, .
Brahmaṇya2 = Viṣṇu .
Brahmaṇyā = Durgā, .
Brahmaṇyadeva1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Brahmaṇyadeva2 = Mahāpuruṣa. .
Brahmapraśnānuśāsana .
Brahmapriya = Skanda, .
Brahmapura i.e. Bráhman, Nīl. rājeva syām ahaṃ sukhīĀnuśāsanik.yathā Be ...Śatakrator Vajradharasya yajñe
Brahmapurohita = Mahāpuruṣa .
Brahmaputra, pl. .
Brahmarāśi, .
Brahmarakṣas, pl. . next.
Brahmarākṣasa, mostly pl. . p, . b .
Brahmarṣi1, pl. . b, . u, . y, . cc, . d, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, .
Brahmarṣi2 . Names of single Brahmarṣis Arvāvasu, . Aṣṭāvakra, . Atri, . Aurva, . Bharadvāja, . Bhṛgu, . Cyavana, . Śuka, . Dadhīca, . Damana, . Devaśarman, . Gautama, . Jājali, . Kāśyapa, . Kṛpa, . Likhita, . Lomaśa, . Maṅkanaka, . Mārkaṇḍeya, . Nārada, . Pulastya, . Ṛcīka, . Vaiśampāyana, . Vasiṣṭha, . Viśvāmitra, . Vyāsa, .
. d Vaiśampāyana said In the midst of the ocean of milk there is a mountain of golden splenr, named Vaijayanta, where Brahmán often used to sit thinking of Adhyātma once, in days of yore, his son Śiva, who had sprung from his forehead, when proceeding along the sky saw him and dropped n before him, and was instructed by him about the many Puruṣas created by him, and the one Puruṣa, who transcends all Puruṣas and is invisible, etc. . Brahmán discoursed on the indications of Puruṣa .
Brahmasabhāvarṇana . In the Kṛta age, Āditya having seen the sabhā of Pitāmaha, which is immeasurable and immaterial, told Nārada, who also desired to see it, to perform a Brahmavrata for, years. Nārada, then, having repaired to Himavat, performed the penance, and then he was taken by Sūrya to the sabhā of Brahmán. Within a moment it assumes a different form, and cannot be described. It is neither cold nor warm, without hunger or thirst, etc. it is not supported by columns it is eternal, etc. There Sarvalokapitāmaha is sitting, himself alone incessantly creating by means of his divine illusion, surrounded by the prajānāṃ patayaḥ, etc. .
Brahmasadana . b, .
Brahmasadas . b, .
Brahmasadman .
Brahmasaṅkāśa, .
Brahmasaras, a tīrtha . At B with holy peaks and resorted to by ṛṣis, Agastya had come to Vaivasvata Dharmarāja himself had dwelt there there all the rivers take their rise and Mahādeva is always present there the Pāṇḍavas per formed cāturmāsya sacrifices together with the great ṛṣiyajña . There is the Akṣayavaṭa, the imperishable sacrificial platform of the gods, where the merit acquired is imperishable. Here they fasted with concentrated souls, and brahmans by hundred came and performed the cāturmāsya sacrifice and talked about various sacred subjects, and the learned and pious Śamatha, who lived in celibacy, told them of Gaya Āmūrtarayasa, . b, .
Brahmasattra, name of a certain religious practice .
Brahmasattrin . ff, .
Brahmasṛj = Śiva, .
Brahmasthāna, a tīrtha .
Brahmāstra, a celestial weapon .
Brahmasutā. b, .
Brahmasūtra, a literary work .
Brahmātman1 = Śiva .
Brahmātman2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Brahmatuṅga .
Brahma Vaśātīya, pl v. Vaśātīya.
Brahmavadhyā . b, .
Brahmavaktra = Śiva, .
Brahmavāluka, a tīrtha .
Brahmavarcasa = Śiva .
Brahmāvarta, a tīrtha .
Brahmavatāṃ variṣṭhaḥ = Skanda, .
Brahmavedhyā, a river .
Brahmavedī = Kuruk ṣetra, .
Brahmavedin .
Brahmavid1 = Śiva .
Brahmavid2 = Skanda, .
Brahmavid3 Viṣṇu .
Brahmavidāṃ vara = Śiva .
Brahmavidyā = Durgā, .
Brahmavidyā .
Brahmavivardhana = Viṣṇu .
Brahmavrata .
Brahmayajña .
Brahmayoni1 . = Pulastya, = Sanatkumāra, = Pracīnabarhi, = Puruṣa, = Taṇḍin, pl . Do. fem. = Menakā, .
Brahmayoni2 .
Brahmayoni3. g, .
Brahmeśaya1 = Skanda, .
Brahmeśaya2 = Mahāpuruṣa
Brahmin = Viṣṇu .
Brahmodumbara .
Brahmopaniṣad, .
Brāhmya, adj. . g, . Brāhma.
Bṛhadaśva1 .
Bṛhadaśva2, king of Ayodhyā .
Bṛhadambālikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Bṛhadbala1, an ancient king .
Bṛhadbala2, son of Subala, the Gāndhāra king . Acala.
Bṛhadbala3 .
Bṛhadbala4, the Kosala king . Kausalya, Kausalendra, Kosalaka, Kosalānām adhipati, Kosslānaṃ bhartṛ, Kosalarāja.
Bṛhadbhānu1 = Bhānu7, .
Bṛhadbhānu2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Bṛhadbhānu3 = Viṣṇu .
Bṛhadbhāsa .
Bṛhadbhāsā .
Bṛhadbrahman .
Bṛhaddyumna, a king .
Bṛhadgarbha, son of Śibi Auśīnara .
Bṛhadguru, an ancient king .
Bṛhadratha1, an ancient king .
Bṛhadratha2 .
Bṛhadratha3, a Māgadha king . b, . Bṛhadratha1.
Bṛhadratha4, a fire, . Vāsiṣṭha.
Bṛhadratha5 .
Bṛhadratha6, a king slain by Māndhātṛ . b, .
Bṛhadratha7 = Paurava, the Aṅga king .
Bṛhadrūpa = Viṣṇu .
Bṛhaduktha, a fire .
Bṛhadvatī, a river . .
Bṛhajjyotis, Bṛhanmanas, Bṛhanmantra .
Bṛhannalā = Arjuna, q.v.
Bṛhanta1, a king .
Bṛhanta2, the Ulūka king . the prec.
Bṛhanta3. b mighty steeds of the Āraṭṭa breed bore B who alone rejecting the opinions of all the Bharatas, had from his reverence for Yudhiṣṭhira, gone over to him, abaning all his cherished wishes, .
Bṛhanta4, a Kuru warrior .
Bṛhanta5, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Bṛhaspati . bis, . b, . b, . c, . d, . b, . u, . w, . bb, . ff, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, Aṅgirasaḥ Vītahavyop.Bharadvājo jyeṣṭhaḥ putro BeḥĀnuśāsanik.Uśanā veda yac chāstraṃ yac ca veda Biḥprabhṛtibhiḥm ivaujasā, i.e. ViśvāmitraĀnuśāsanik.eś ca saṃvādam Indrasya cadevapurohitaḥinstructed king Māndhātṛ about kineSuvarṇotpattithe first of Aṅgiras eight sons, called VāruṇasĀnuśā sanik.prāhaprabhṛtibhir Brahmar ṣibhiḥAvikṣitsamo buddhyā, i.e. AvikṣitSaṃvartta Maruttīyason of Aṅgiras and brother of Saṃvarttaeḥ saṃvādaṃ Maruttasya caAṅgirasaḥ putraṃ devācāryaṃPurandarau er avarajaḥ, i.e. Saṃvarttaer anujaṃ, i.e. SaṃvarttaGuruśiṣyas.B. is the lord of the brahmansAgastyaĀśramavāsap.ivaVidura surpassed B. in intelligencePutradarśanap.Droṇa was born from a part of B.Svargārohaṇap.ṃ viveśātha Droṇo hy Aṅgirasāṃ varaṃ
Bṛhaspati2 = Śiva .
Bṛhaspatisuta = Kaca, .
Bṛhat1 .
Bṛhat2, an Asura .
Bṛhat3, a Sāman . o, .
Bṛhat4 = Bráhman, .
Bṛhat5 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Bṛhat6 = Viṣṇu .
Bṛhatketu, an ancient king .
Bṛhatkīrti, son of Aṅgiras .
Bṛhatkṣattra1, a Kaikeya prince . Kaikeya.
Bṛhatkṣattra2 .
Bṛhatsena, a king .
Bṛhatsenā, the nurse of Damayantī .
Bṛṃhitā, a mātṛ .
Budbudā, an Apsaras .
Buddhi .
Buddhikāmā, a mātṛ. u, .
Budha, the planet Mercury . b, . e, . b, Kṛṣṇa Vāsudevamarried to Ilā and father of PurūravasĀnuśāsanik.
Caśāti, pl a people, .
Caidya, .
Caidyā, .
Caidyādhipati .
Caitra .
Caitraratha1 . b, .
Caitraratha2 .
Caitraratha3 = Śaśabindu, .
Caitraratha parvan .
Caitrarathaparvan . Within a few days there came a brahman to the abode of their host, whom they asked to narrate the birth of Dhṛṣṭadyumna from the sacrificial fire, and that of Kṛṣṇā from the centre of the vedī, and that of Śikhaṇḍin, and how Dhṛṣṭadyumna learnt the use of all weapons from Droṇa, and how the friendship of Droṇa and Drupada was broken . The brahman related the birth of Droṇa, his friendship with Drupada, and his visit to Rāma, the breaking of his friendship with Drupada, how Bhīṣma prevailed upon him to teach the princes, etc and the chastisement of Drupada . Draupadī sambhava . Hearing the words of the brahman, the sons of Kuntī seemed to be, as it were, pierced with darts. Kuntī proposed to Yudhiṣṭhira that they should go to the Pāñcālas, a country they had not seen before, and he consented for his part. When the other brothers had likewise consented, they set out for the town of Drupada . When they were living disguised, Vyāsa came and told them that formerly the daughter of a ṛṣi, notwith standing her beauty, obtained no husband, and therefore by austerities propitiated Śaṅkara five times, saying Give me a husband. Accordingly the god said that she should in a future life have five husbands. That damsel is Kṛṣṇā, appointed to be the wife of ye all go therefore to the capital of the Pāñcālas and dwell ye there. He then left them . After Vyāsa had gone away, the Pāṇḍavas proceeded in a northerly direction, walking day and night till they reached the tīrtha Somāśrayāyaṇa . Then they arrived at the Gaṅgā Dhanañjaya walked before them, torch in hand. The Gandharva king with his wives was then sporting there in the Geṅgā. Bending his bow to a circle, he said, Excepting the first lavas, the muhūrta that begins with the twilight preceding nightfall has been appointed for the Yakṣas, Gandharvas, and Rākṣasas, capable of going everywhere at will the rest has been appointed for man to his work. If therefore men, wandering during those moments from greed of gain, come near us, both we and the rākṣasas slay those fools. Therefore persons acquainted with the Vedas never applaud those men, who then approach any piece of water. Stay ye at a distance. Know that am Aṅgāraparṇa, the friend of Kubera, and this my forest is also called Aṅgāraparṇa, where neither kauṇapas, nor śṛṅgins, nor gods, nor men can come. Arjuna replied Whether it be night, or twilight, who can bar others from the ocean, the Himālaya, and Gangā . Arjuna burnt the Gandharvas chariot with the Āgneya weapon, given by Bṛhaspati to Bharadvāja, by him to Agniveśya, by him to Droṇa, by Droṇa to Arjuna, and dragged him, who had become unconscious, by the hair. His wife Kumbhīnasī prevailed upon Yudhiṣṭhira, and he commanded Arjuna to spare him. He declared that, instead of his former name, Citraratha, he should now be called Dagdharatha, and imparted to Arjuna the Gāndharvī vidyā called Cākṣuṣī . He also gave Arjuna and each of his brothers one hundred horses born in the country of the Gandharvas, endued with the speed of wind and employed in carrying the gods and Gandharvas, a portion of Indras vajra . Arjuna in return gave him the Āgneya weapon, and asked him why they, though skilled in the Vedas, had been censured by him. He replied that it was because they were without fires, without sacriflces, and without a brahman walking before them. The Yakskas, Rākṣasas, Gandharvas, Piśācas, Uragas, and Dānavas know the history of the Kuru race have heard from Nārada and other devarṣis the deeds of your ancestors. have been vanquished by thee in battle on account of the brahmacarya being rigidly observed a kṣattriya, who is addicted to lust, if he fights in the night, can never escape with life but even if addicted to lust, he who has a purohita may vanquish all wanderers of the night. Therefore, O Tāpatya kings should always select a fit purohita . Citraratha related Tapatyupākhyāna . Vāsiṣṭha . Aurvopākhyāna . Vasiṣṭopākhyāna . Dhaumya purohitakaraṇa .
Caitraseni1, a prince .
Caitraseni2, patron. .
Caitravāhanī = Citrāṅgadā, .
Caitrī, the day of full moon in the month of Caitra .
Caitya, a mountain near Girivraja, the following .
Caityaka .
Cakra1, a serpent .
Cakra2, companions of Skanda. u
Cakra3, the discus of Kṛṣṇa .
Cakra4, pl a people .
Cakracara, pl a sort of ṛṣi . b, .
Cakradeva, a Vṛṣṇi warrior .
Cakradhanus, a ṛṣi .
Cakradhara, adj .
Cakradhārin = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Cakradharman, the chief of the Vidyādharas .
Cakradvāra, a mountain and its genius. b, .
Cakragadābhṛt = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Cakragadādhara1 = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Cakragadādhara2 = Viṣṇu .
Cakraka, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Cakramaṇḍa, a serpent .
Cakranemi, a mātṛ. u, .
Cakrapāṇi = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Cakrāti, pl a people .
Cakravāka, pl a sort of goose, Anas casarca, Gm .
Cakravyūha, a kind of array. g, .
Cakrāyudha = Viṣṇu and Kṛṣṇa.
Cakrin1 = Viṣṇu .
Cakrin2 = Śiva, .
Cakṣurājya = Mahāpuruṣa .
Cakṣurvardhanikā, a river in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Cakṣus1 .
Cakṣus2 = Śiva, .
Cākṣuṣa1, a Manu .
Cākṣuṣa2, adj. . b, cākṣuṣaṃ janma dvitīyaṃ Brahmaṇaḥ
Cākṣuṣā, a Gandharvic science given to Arjuna by Citraratha . b C. had been communicated by Manu to Soma, by Soma to Viśvāvasu, and by Viśvāvasu to Citraratha after ascetic penances, and when communicated by the preceptor to a man without energy, it becomes fruitless. By means of it one may see whatever one wishes. One can acquire it only by standing on one leg for six months but Arjuna obtained it without any rigid vow. This knowledge makes the Gandharvas superior to men and equal to the gods.
Cala = Śiva . Do. = Viṣnu .
Calācala = Śiva .
Camasa, a tīrtha .
Camasodbheda, a tīrtha . c, .
Camasodbhedana, a tīrtha .
Campā, the metropolis of the Aṅgas . b, . Mālinī.
Campakāraṇya, a wood .
Cāmpeya, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Camūhara, a Viśvedeva .
Camūstambhana = Śiva .
Caṇḍa1 = Skanda, .
Caṇḍa2 = Śiva .
Caṇḍā = Durgā, .
Caṇḍabala, a monkey .
Caṇḍabhārgava, a brahman .
Caṇḍadhāra = Śiva .
Caṇḍakauśika, a muni, son of Kākṣīvat .
Caṇḍāla1, name of a caste . b, .
Caṇḍāla2, sg. = Mataṅga, .
Cāṇḍāla1 . g, . b, .
Cāṇḍāla2, sg. = Parigha, foll.
Cāṇḍālikāśrama, a tīrtha. By repairing to C. and bathing in Kokāmukha, after having subsisted upon potherbs and having worn ragged clothes, one is sure to obtain ten maidens, .
Candana = Śiva .
Candanin = Śiva .
Caṇḍatuṇḍaka, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Caṇḍī = Durgā, .
Caṇḍikaghaṇṭa = Śiva .
Candra1 = Śiva .
Candra2, v. Soma.
Candra3, an Asura . Candramas.
Candrabha, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Candrabhāgā, a river, the present Chenāb . b Bathing for seven days in the C. or the Vitastā, one is sure to become purified from all sins and endued with the merits of an ascetic, . b, .
Candraśilā, a mātṛ. u, .
Candrāśva, son of Kuvalāśva .
Candradeva1, a Kuru warrior .
Candradeva2, a Pāñcāla prince .
Candrahantṛ, an Asura .
Candraka, an owl. b, .
Candraketu, a Kuru warrior .
Candramā, a river in Bhāratavarṣa .
Candramas1, v. Soma.
Candramas2, an Asura . Candra.
Candramasas tīrtha, a tīrtha. b, .
Cāndramasī, the wife of Bṛhaspati .
Candramaulivibhūṣaṇa = Śiva, .
Candrāṃśu = Viṣṇu .
Candrānana = Skanda, .
Candrapramardana, an Asura .
Candrārdhakṛtaśīrṣa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Candrasena1, a prince, son of Samudrasena .
Candrasena2, a Kuru warrior .
Candrasena2 .
Candrasya vināśana, an Asura .
Candravaktra = Śiva .
Candravarman .
Candrāvarta = Śiva .
Candravatsa, pl a people .
Candrodaya, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Caṇūra1, a prince .
Caṇūra2 .
Caṇūrāndhraniṣūdana = Viṣṇu .
Capala, an ancient king .
Capalākṣa = Abhimanyu, .
Capalekṣaṇa = Abhimanyu, .
Cāpin = Śiva .
Carācarasya pratihartṛ = Śiva .
Carācarasya sraṣṭṛ = Śiva .
Carācarātman1 = Śiva . Do. = Sūrya, .
Cāraṇa, pl a class of beings . b, . h, . i, . b, . b, . g, . b, . . b, .
Cāritra = Kṛṣṇa, .
Carmakāra, a caste, .
Carmamaṇḍala, pl a people .
Carmaṇvatī, a river, now Chambal . b, .
Carmavāsas = Śiva, .
Carmavat, brother of Śakuni .
Carmin = Śiva .
Carucelin = Śiva .
Cārucitra, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Cārucitrāṅgada.
Cārucitrāṅgada, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Cārucitra.
Cāruśīrṣa, a muni .
Cāruśravas, son of Kṛṣṇa and Rukmiṇī. .
Cārudeṣṇa, son of Kṛṣṇa and Rukmiṇī . .
Cāruliṅga = Śiva .
Cārunetrā, an Apsaras .
Cāruvaktra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Cāruveśa, son of Kṛṣṇa and Rukmiṇī .
Cāruyaśas, son of Kṛṣṇa and Rukmiṇī .
Cārvāka, a Rākṣasa, friend of Duryodhana .
Cāsávaktra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Cāturāśramyanetṛ = Śiva .
Caturaśva, an ancient king .
Caturasra = Viṣṇu .
Caturātman1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Caturātman2 = Viṣṇu .
Caturbāhu = Viṣṇu .
Caturbhāva = Viṣṇu .
Caturbhuja1 = Viṣṇu . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Caturdaṃṣṭra1, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Caturdaṃṣṭra2 = Viṣṇu .
Caturgati = Viṣṇu .
Cāturhotrapravartaka = Śiva .
Cāturmahārājika = Mahāpuruṣa .
Caturmukha1 = Brahmán, .
Caturmukha2 = Śiva .
Caturmūrti1 = Brahmán, .
Caturmūrti2 = Viṣṇu .
Caturmūrtidhṛt = Viṣṇu, .
Caturvaktra = Brahmán, . Caturmukha.
Cāturvarṇyakara = Śiva .
Caturveda1, pl a sort of pitṛs .
Caturveda2 = Brahmán, .
Caturveda3 = Śiva .
Caturvedavid = Viṣṇu .
Cāturvidya, n .
Caturvyūha = Viṣṇu, .
Caturyuga = Śiva .
Catuṣkarṇī, a mātṛ. u, .
Catuṣpatha = Śiva .
Catuṣpathaniketā, a mātṛ. u, .
Catuṣpatharata = Śiva .
Catuṣpatharatā, a mātṛ. u, .
Catvaravāsinī, a mātṛ. u, .
Caura, pl a people .
Cedi, pl a people . d, i.e. Dhṛṣṭaketu, came with one akṣauhiṇī of troops to YudhiṣṭhiraSañjayayānap.Karūṣakāḥ...bhūmipālāḥ, took the part of the PāṇḍavasYānasandhip.among the allies of YudhiṣṭhiraPāñ cālaiḥ, Bhagavadyānap.Sahajaś C MatsyānāṃPāñcāla Kaikayāḥ PāñcālāḥAmbopākhyānap.Kāśi Karūṣāṇāṃ netārāṃ...Dhṛṣṭaketuṃ Dhṛṣṭaketuś ca Cīnāṃ pranetāJambūkh.Matsya Karūṣāś ca, in BhāratavarṣaBhīṣmavadhap.Kāśi Karūṣeṣu Matsyeṣu Matsya KarūṣāḥKāśi KarūṣaiḥPāñcāla Karūṣa MatsyāḥKāśi KarūṣāṇāṃKāśi KarūṣāṇāṃMatsya Pāñcāla CīnāṃDroṇābhiṣ.Kārūṣaiḥ, attack Droṇaeko pasṛtya Cbhyaḥ Pāṇḍavān yaḥ samāśritaḥ DhṛṣṭaketuṃSaṃśaptakavadhap.Kārūṣa Kośalāḥ, attack Droṇa KekayānDhṛṣṭaketuṃ Cīnām ṛṣabhaṃayaś cāparePāñcāla PāṇḍūnāṃPratijñāp.Jayadrathavadhap.Dhṛṣṭaketuś ca Cīnām ṛṣabhaḥPāñcāla SṛñjayānDhṛṣṭa ketuś ca Cīnām ṛṣabhaḥ Pāñcāla SṛñjayāḥPāñcāla SṛñjayānGhaṭotkacavadhap.Kārūṣa KośalāḥPāñcāla SomakāḥDroṇavadhap. Kaikeya Sṛñjayān MatsyeṣuNārāyaṇā stramokṣap.yuvarājaś ca Cīnāṃprabhuṃ yuvarājaṃ, = slain by AśvatthāmanKarṇap.Dhṛṣṭa ketuḥ...Cīnāṃ pravaro rathaḥPāñcāla Kaikayāḥ Kārūṣa Matsyānāṃamong those who know the eternal religionPāñcāla Cīnāṃ Kaikeya PāñcālāḥPāṇḍava PāñśālāḥPāñcālyaṃ C Kaikeyasaṃvṛtaṃ, i.e. Dhṛṣṭadyumna īnāñ ca mahārathān Kaikeya Pāñcāleṣu Pāñcāla Pāṇḍavān Kāśi PāñcālānPāñcāla KaikayānPāñcālānŚalyap.have been slainAnugītāp.purīṃ ramyāṃ Cīnāṃ śuktisāhvayāṃ, i.e. Śuktimatīīnām īśvaraḥ, i.e. VasuPutradarśanap.no longer exist
Cedidhvaja .
Cedija, .
Cedika, pl a people = Cedi .
Cedipa, .
Cedipati, .
Cedipuṅgava1 = Śiśupāla, . Do. = Dhṛṣṭa ketu, .
Cedirāj, .
Cedirāja, .
Cedivṛṣa = Śiśupāla, .
Cekita = Cekitāna1 .
Cekitāna1, a Vṛṣṇi . Sāttvata, Vārṣṇeya.
Cekitāna2 = Śiva, .
Cetasaka, pl v. Vetasaka.
Chada = Śiva .
Chāgavaktra = Skanda, .
Chandas1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Chaneva. b, .
Chatravatī, a city . Ahicchattra.
Chattra = Śiva .
. b Bhīṣma said In ancient times Jamadagni Bhārgava was practising with his bow Reṇukā used to pick up the arrows and bring them back to him. One at noontide, when the Sun was in Jyeṣṭhāmūla, Reṇukā, her head and feet being scorched by the heat of the Sun, rested for a moment under a tree, whereafter Jamadagni threatened to shoot the Sun. The Sun, in the guise of a brahman, approached him and reminded him that the Sun produces food, etc. . questioned by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma said As Jamadagni did not desist from his anger, the brahman reminded him that the Sun is always in motion and cannot therefore be pierced Jamadagni, knowing Sūrya, said that the Sun stays at midday for a moment. Then Sūrya sought his protection, and Jamadagni comforted him, saying he who would slay one who asks for protection would transcend the simplicity that exists in brahmans, etc. . Sūrya presented him with an umbrella and a pair of sandals, saying, from this day the gift of these articles in all religious rites shall be established as an indispensable usage. .
Chāya = Śiva .
Chettṛ = Śiva .
Chinnasaṃśaya = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Chinnatṛṣṇa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Cicchila, pl a people .
Cikura, a serpent, father of the serpent Sumukha .
Cīna, pl a people .
Cīnaka, pl a people = the Cīnas .
Cintyadyotāḥ, a gaṇa of gods .
Cirakāri, Cirakārika, Cirakārin, son of Gautama .
Cirāntaka, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Cīravāsas1, a king .
Cīravāsas2, a Yakṣa .
Cīravāsas3 = Śiva, .
Cīriṇī, a river .
Citibhasmapriya = Śiva .
Citra1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Citra2, a serpent .
Citra3, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Citra4, brother of Citrasena, the Abhisāra king .
Citra5, a Pāñcāla warrior .
Citrā, a nakṣatra .
Citrabāhu, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Citrabarha, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Citrabarhin, son of Garuḍa. u, .
Citrabhānu1 = Agni
Citrabhānu2 = Śiva .
Citracāpa, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Citraśikhaṇḍin1 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Citraśikhaṇḍin2, pl = the seven Ṛṣis. c, . Do pl = Ekata, Dvita, and Trita. c, .
Citraśilā, a river .
Citrāśva = Satyavat, .
Citradeva, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Citradharman, a prince .
Citragupta .
Citraka1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Citraka2, pl a people .
Citraketu1, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Citraketu2, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Citraketusuta = Suketu, .
Citrākṣa, son of Dhṛtaraṣṭra .
Citrakuṇḍala, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Citrakūṭa, a mountain . m If one observing a fast bathes at C. and Janasthāna, and in the water of Mandākinī, he is sure to obtain royal prosperity, .
Citralekhā, an Apsaras .
Citrāṅga, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Citrāṅgada1, son of Śāntanu and Satyavatī .
Citrāṅgada2, a prince .
Citrāṅgada3, a Kuru warrior .
Citrāṅgada4, a Kaliṅga king .
Citrāṅgada5, a Daśārṇa king .
Citrāṅgadā, daughter of Citravāhana and mother of Babhru vāhana In the encounter between Arjuna and Babhruvāhana both fell n in a swoon. Babhruvāhana regained consciousness and C. prevailed upon Ulūpī to revive Arjuna . Caitravāhanī.
Citrāṅgadā, an Apsaras. b, .
Citrāṅgadāsuta, son of Citrāṅgadā = Babhruvāhana, .
Citrāṅgadātmaja, = Babhruvāhana, .
Citrāṅgaākhyāna, episode relating to Cit rāṅgada . Two sons were born of Satyavatī, Citrāṅgada and Vicitravīrya. Before the last had attained to majority, Śāntanu died and ascended to heaven, Bhīṣma placed Citrāṅgada on the throne. Citrāṅgada considered nobody his equal, not even the gods and Asuras. Therefore the king of the Gandharvas bearing the same name fought a three years battle with him at Kurukṣetra on the banks of the Sarasvatī, where Citrāṅgada was slain then the Gandharva ascended to heaven. Bhīṣma installed Vicitravīrya, yet in his minority, on the throne of the Kurus and ruled for him.
Citraratha1, king of the Gandharvas . h, . Aṅgāraparṇa, Dagdharatha, Gandharva, Gandharvarāja.
Citraratha2, king of Mṛttikāvatī .
Citraratha3, brother of the Pāñcāla prince Vīraketu .
Citraratha4, an Aṅga king. b, . Aṅgapati, Angeśvara, Aṅgendra.
Citraratha5, the great grandfather of Kṛṣṇa. b, .
Citrarathā, a river .
Citrasaini, v. Caitraseni.
Citrasena1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Citrasena2, son of the elder Parikṣit .
Citrasena3, a Gandharva . b, . Gandharva, Gandharvarāj, Gandharvarāja, Gandharvarājan.
Citrasena4, the general of king Jarāsandha .
Citrasena5, a prince .
Citrasena6, king of the Abhisāras, brother of Citra .
Citrasena7, a Pāñcāla warrior .
Citrasena8, brother of Karṇa .
Citrasena9, a serpent .
Citrasena1, son of Karṇa .
Citrasena1, various Kuru warriors .
Citrasenā, an Apsaras .
Citrasenā, a river .
Citrasenā, a mātṛ. u, .
Citravahā, a river .
Citravāhana, king of Maṇipūra .
Citravāṇa, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Citrabāhu.
Citravarman1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Citravarman2, a prince .
Citravarman3, brother of Vīraketu .
Citravarman4, son of Sucitra .
Citravegika, a serpent .
Citrāyudha1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Citrāyudha2, a prince .
Citrāyudha3, one or more princes who sided with the Pāṇḍavas .
Citrāyudha4, a Kuru warrior .
Citropalā, a river .
Civuka, pl a barbarous people .
Cola1, pl a people in the present Tanjore .
Cola2, king of the Colas .
Cucuka, pl a people .
Cūcuka, v. Cucuka.
Cucupa, v. Cūcupa.
Cūcupa, pl a people .
Culakā, v. Culukā.
Cūlika, v. Cūcupa.
Culukā, a river .
Cyavana1, a ṛṣi, son of Bhṛgu . b, Uñchavṛttyup.BhārgavaṃViśvāmitrop.syātma sambhavaḥ Ṛcīka iti vikhyātaḥsyātmajaḥ, i.e. ṚcīkaĀnuśāsanik.Nahuṣasya ca saṃvādaṃ maharṣeś Csya caCyavanop.maharṣiś Co BhārgavaḥBhṛgunandanaṃBhṛgoḥ putraṃBhṛgūdvaḥaḥC. having been caught in the net of some fishers, the price of him is settled to be a cowsya saṃvādaṃ Kuśikasya caCyavana Kuśikasaṃv.BhārgavaḥBhṛgunandanaḥbrahmarṣeḥC. will destroy the race of Kuśika, but is gratified by him, and promises that Viśvāmitra, a descendant of Kuśika, will become a brahmanSuvarṇotpattithe first of the seven sons of BhṛguĀnuśāsanik.attained to heaven by fastPavanārjunasaṃv. Kapa, pl.took away the earth from the godsĀnuśāsanik.Bhārgavaḥ, among the ṛṣis of the northSaṃ vartta Maruttīyacf.
Cyavana2, .
the discourse between Cyavana and Kuśika. c Bhīṣma said Cyavana Bhārgava saw the stain that would affect his own race and desired to consume the race of the Kuśikas he came and said to king Kuśika that he desired to dwell with him for some time. Kuśika and his wife welcomed and honoured him according to his desire, they promised to serve him, while he observed a vow. Once he slept for twenty one days, while Kuśika and the queen kept themselves awake, foregoing all food then Cyavana went out, followed by the king and the queen, and disappeared the king with the queen sorrowfully returned to the palace, where he found Cyavana stretched as before on his bed, and sat by his side, while he slept for twenty one days then Cyavana ordered them to rub him, and then entered the bathing house, and once more disappeared by means of his yoga power. The next time, C. was seen on the throne then he ordered food, but reduced it all to ashes, and disappeared. Kuśika with his queen stood there in the same posture the whole night without speaking a word, without giving way to wrath. So it went on every day. Cyavana failed to notice any fault in the conduct of the king. Then he ordered them to yoke themselves to a chariot and pull him along it should be the kings battle chariot with every weapon, etc and the goad they must drag him slowly in the sight of the people, who lamented suddenly he struck them with the goad, so that they were covered with blood no food had passed their lips for fifty nights on his way he began to give away very largely of the kings property. Then Cyavana, delighted, came n from the chariot, unharnessed the royal couple, and granted them a boon he softly touched them with his hands, the healing virtues of which were like ambrosia, and all their fatigue, etc was dispelled, and they once more became endued with youth. He dismissed them till the next himself remaining on the banks of the Gaṅgā. Meanwhile Cyavana, by his yoga power, converted that delightful wood on the bank of the Gaṅgā into a retreat full of wealth of every kind and jewels and gems . The next morning Kuśika came with his wife, and saw that palace made entirely of gold, etc and Aps. and G and thought that it was the country of the Uttara Kurus or Indras abode Amarāvatī. Cyavana lay stretched on a costly and excellent bed, and at the same time on a mat of kuśa grass. In a moment everything disappeared, Aps G etc. Cyavana praised Kuśika and his queen Kuśika said that he had a sufficient boon, not having been consumed by the fire of Cyavanas penances he asked him to expound some bts . Asked by Kuśika, Cyavana explained the reason of his conduct In days past, when the gods had assembled together, he had heard Brahmán say that, owing to a contention between brahman and kṣattriya energy, there would occur an intermixture in his race therefore he had resolved to exterminate the Kuśikas, but had failed to find any fault with Kuśika seeing the delightful palace he had created, Kuśika had had a foretaste of heaven and had become desirous of the status of a brahman and the merit of penances the person who will be the third in descent from thee shall attain to the status of a brahman through the energy of the Bhṛgus, thy grandson will be an ascetic endued with the splenr of fire shall set out on a tīrthayātrā. Kuśika asked in what way the status of brahmanhood would attach to his race . Cyavana foretold that the Kṣattriyas would exterminate the Bhārgavas, except Ūrva, who would cast the fire of his wrath into the mares mouth in the Ocean he would have a son Ṛcīka, to whom Dhanurveda in its incarnate form would come in order to exterminate all Kṣattriyas he would communicate it to his son Jamadagni Kuśika Gādhi Ūrva Viśvāmitra Ṛcīka Jamadagni Rāma Kuśika became filled with joy Cyavana set out on his tīrtha yātrā everything fell out as Cyavana had said .
the episode relating to Cyavana. b Bhīṣma said In days past M. ṛ. Cyavana Bhārgava set himself for twelve years to udavāsa at the confluence of the Gaṅgā and Yamunā, and stood there like a wooden post . He was caught in the net of some fishers along with a large number of fish, etc. They were afraid Cyavana said that he would either die with the fishes or be sold with them. With pale faces the fishers repaired to king Nahuṣa, who immediately went to Cyavana with his ministers and priest Cyavana asked him to pay the price for himself and the fishes Nahuṣa ordered large sums to be paid to the Niṣādas for Cyavana but the latter declared that these could not represent his price, even his whole king Nahuṣa deliberated with his ministers and priests then there came an ascetic living in the woods, born of a cow, and said that the cow was equal in value to the brahman this Cyavana approved of, as svāhā and vaṣaṭ kāra are always established upon kine, etc. Cyavana accepted the cow from the fisher men, and caused them along with the fishes to proceed to heaven. The two Ṛ. gladdened king Nahuṣa by granting him many boons he accepted the boon that he should himself remain firm in virtue. The two Ṛ. returned each to his own asylum, and Nahuṣa to his city . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about Rāma Jāmadagnya, etc Bhīṣma recited an old history of the discourse between Cyavana and Kuśika, i.e. Cyavana Kuśika saṃvāda .
Śabala, a serpent .
Śabalāśva, a prince .
Śabalākṣa, a ṛṣi .
Śabara, pl a barbarous people . n, . b, . b, . g, . c, .
Śabda .
Śabdasaha = Viṣṇu .
Śabdātiga = Viṣṇu .
Śacī, the queen of Indra, daughter of Puloman and mother of Jayanta . c, . u, . b, Umā Maheśvarasaṃv.Kauśikasya Cī satīyathā ...ŚacīŚakrasya mahiṣīṃ priyāṃŚacyāJayantam iva PaulomīMaghavān iva PyāMahendra iva Pyā
Śacīpati = Indra, q.v.
Śaśa = Śiva .
Śāśabindava1, pl . Do adj .
Śaśabindu1, an ancient king, son of Citraratha bis King Ś. was invincible, etc per formed diverse sacrifices, and had, wives, who bore each, sons of great prowess, who performed millions of sacrifices . Ś. gave away all those sens to the brahmans, each with hundreds upon hundreds of chariots, etc. upon the completion of his horse sacrifice mountains of food and drink remained. At last he ascended to heaven. b, .
Śaśabindu2 = Viṣṇu .
Śaśabindu3, pl descendants of Śaśabindu . b, .
Śaśāda, an ancient king of Ayodhyā .
Śaśaka, pl a people .
Śaśalakṣaṇa = Soma, q.v.
Śaśaloman, an ancient king .
Śaśāṅka1 = Soma, .
Śaśāṅka2 = Śiva .
Śaśayāna, a tīrtha. .
Śaśija, son of the Moon = Budha, .
Śaśika, pl a people .
Śaśin1 = Soma, q.v.
Śaśin2 = Śiva .
Śaśolūkamukhī, a mātṛ. u, .
Śāśvata1 = Sūrya, .
Śāśvata2 = Śiva .
Śāśvata3 = Viṣṇu .
Śaibāla, pl v. Śaivala, pl.
Śaibya1, an ancient king .
Śaibya2, Govāsana .
Śaibya3, one of Kṛṣṇas horses .
Śaibya4, a Vṛṣṇi prince .
Śaibya5, a prince slain by Kṛṣṇa. b, .
Śaibya6 = Koṭikāsya, .
Śaibya7, king of the Śibis, various princes at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira . Possibly identical with or .
Śaibya8 = Śibi Auśīnara, .
Śaibya9 = Vṛṣādarbhi, .
Śaibya1, v. Śaivya.
Śaibyā = Sunandā, .
Śaibyā, wife of Sagara .
Śaibyā, wife of Dyumatsena .
Śaibyā, wife of Kṛṣṇa .
Śaibyā, a river .
Śaibya Sugrīvavāhana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śaibyātmaja .
Śaiśava, pl a people .
Śaiśira, a mountain .
Śaiśupāla, v. Śaiśupāli.
Śaiśupāli = Dhṛṣṭaketu, .
Śaikhaṇḍi = Kṣattradeva, .
Śaikhāvatya, a brahman .
Śaila1 .
Śaila2, a celestial weapon .
Śailābha, a Viśvedeva .
Śailaguru = Himavat, q.v.
Śailāḥ, .
Śailakampin, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Śailālaya, an ancient king, grandfather of Bhagadatta .
Śailaputrī = Umā, q.v.
Śailarāj, Śailarāja = Himavat, q.v.
Śailarājasutā = Gaṅgā, .
Śailarājasutā = Umā, q.v.
Śailasutā = Gaṅgā, .
Śailendra1 = Vindhya, .
Śailendra2 = Himavat, q.v.
Śailodā, a river .
Śailūṣa, a Gandharva .
Śaineya1 = Sātyaki, q.v.
Śaineya2, pl descendants of Śini .
Śaineyanandana = Sātyaki, q.v.
Śairīṣaka, name of a place .
Śaivala, pl a people .
Śaivya1 .
Śaivya2, Śaivyā, Śaivyātmaja .
Śaka, pl a people . b, .
Śāka, a tree in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Śākadvīpa, a dvīpa named after the Śāka tree . b Ś. is of twice the extent of Jambudvīpa, and the ocean also is of twice the extent of that island. Ś. is surrounded on all sides by the ocean. The kings there are full of righteousness, and the men never die there is no famine the people are all full of forbearance and great energy. There are seven mountains decked with jewels, etc and many rivers. The mountains are Meru, the abode of Ṛ and G. Malaya, to the east there the clouds are generated, and thence they disperse on all sides Jaladhāra, whence Indra daily takes water, and from that we get showers of rain Raivataka, over which the constellation Revati is placed by Brahmán himself on the north of this is Śyāma. Because the hue of these mountains is dark, the people residing there are all dark in complexion Durga śaila Keśarin . The measure of each of these mountains is ble that of the one mentioned immediately before. There are seven Varṣas one for each mountain. In the midst is a large tree called Śāka, in height and breadth equal to the Jambu tree in Jambudvīpa, and it is always aed by the people. There are many delightful provinces where Śiva is worshipped, and thither repair Si and Cā. The people are virtuous, and all the four orders are devoted to their respective occupations. There is no instance of theft. They are free from decrepitude and death, and gifted with long life. The rivers are full of sacred water whence Indra draws water to shower it as rain. Gaṅgā herself is among them. They are all sin cleansing. There are four sacred provinces . There is no king and no punishment, and no person that deserves to be punished, .
Śākala1, a city, the capital of the Madras .
Śākala2, pl the inhabitants of Śākala .
Śākala dvīpa, a country . next.
Śākaladvīpa .
Śākalya, a ṛṣi .
Śākambharī, a tīrtha, named after Ś. = Durgā .
Śākambharī = Durgā, .
Śākavaktra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Śākha, a son or form of Skanda. b, . u, .
Śakra1 = Indra .
Śakra2 = Śiva .
Śākra, belonging to Indra .
Śakrabhavana, the abode of Indra .
Śakradeva, son of the Kaliṅga king .
Śakraja = Arjuna, q.v.
Śakraloka, the world of Indra . f, . b, . b, . k, . b, .
the discourse between Indra and Namuci. b When the Asura Namuci, who was conversant with the birth and death of all creatures, was sitting, divested of prosperity but un troubled at heart, bound with cords, brought under the sway of his foes, etc Indra asked him if he grieved or passed his days cheerfully. Namuci answers that he s not grieve, and explains why, citing Gautama .
Śakranandana = Arjuna, q.v.
Śakrāṇī = Śacī, q.v.
Śakraprastha = Indraprastha, q.v.
Śakrapurī = Indraprastha, q.v.
Śakraputra = Vālin, .
Śakra sabhā varṇana, description of the palace of Indra. The sabhā of Śakra is built by Śakra himself, yojanas in breadth, yojanas in length, yojanas in height, capable of going everywhere at will, named Puṣkaramālinī. There Indra sits with Śacī, Śrī, and Lakṣmī, the Maruts, the Siddhas, the Devarṣis, the Sādhyas, the Devagaṇas. Enumeration of Devarṣis and celestial beings .
Śakrasārathi = Mātali, q.v.
Śakrasūnu = Arjuna, q.v.
Śakrasuta = Arjuna, q.v.
Śakrasya tīrtha, the tīrtha of Indra .
Śakrātmaja = Arjuna, q.v.
Śakrātmajātmaja, son of the son of Indra = Abhi manyu, .
Śakravāpin, a serpent .
Śakrāvarta, a tīrtha .
Śakta1, a prince .
Śakta2 = Śiva .
Śākta, Śākteḥ putra, Śakteya, v. Śaktr.
Śakti1, probably a more correct reading instead of Śaktri .
Śakti2 .
Śaktidhara = Skanda, .
Śaktija, v. Śaktrija.
Śaktimat, v. Śuktimat.
Śaktimatāṃ śreṣṭha = Viṣṇu .
Śaktiputra, v. Śaktriputra.
Śāktra, son of Śakti = Parāśara, .
Śaktreḥ putra = Parāśara, .
Śāktreya = Parāśara, .
Śaktri, a ṛṣi, son of Vasiṣṭha and father of Parāśara . b, . Vāsiṣṭha.
Śaktrija, son of Śakti = Parāśara, .
Śaktriputra = Parāśara, .
the episode about the Śakula fishes. b In a lake that was not very deep and which abounded in fishes, there lived three Śakula fishes that were friends amongst those three, one had much fore thought another was possessed of great presence of mind the third was pro crastinating . One day certain fishermen coming to that lake began to bale out its waters to a lower ground through diverse outlets. He of great forethought, having in vain warned the others, immediately set out through a current and reached another deep lake. The procrastinating one was caught with many others and tied to a string. He of presence of mind thrust himself into the company of those so tied, and remained quietly among them biting the string, and escaped when the fishes were removed to a piece of deep water to be washed. The procrastinating one met with his death .
Śakuna, pl a people .
Śakuni1, son of the Gāndhāra king Subala and brother in law of Dhṛtarāṣṭra ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, . also the following synonyms Gāndhāra, q.v. Gāndhārapati, q.v. Gāndhārarāja, q.v. Gāndhārarājaputra, Gāndhārarājasya putra, Gāndhārarājasya suta, q.v. Kitava, q.v. Pārvatīya, . Saubala, . Saubalaka, . Saubaleya, . Subalaja, . Subalaputra, . Subalasya putra, . Subalasya suta, . Subalātmaja, .
Śakuni2, a serpent .
Śakuni3, a demon .
Śakuni4 = Śiva .
Śākuni = Ulūka, .
Śakunigraha, a demon = Vinatā .
Śakunikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Śakuniputra, the son of Śakuni, king of the Gāndhāras .
Śakunisuta = Ulūka, .
Śakunta, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Śakuntalā, daughter of Viśvāmitra and Menakā, wife of Duṣyanta, and mother of Bharata .
Śākuntala, son of Śakuntalā = Bharata, .
Śakuntalopākhyāna, episode relating to Śakun talā Duṣyanta saw Śakuntalā, daughter of Viśvāmitra and Menakā. Enumeration of the eight forms of marriage according to Manu. Duṣyanta, during the absence of Kaṇva, wedded Śakuntalā according to the Gāndharva form, promising her that her son should be the heir apparent, and departing told her that he should send troops to take her to his capital. Kaṇva, by his spiritual knowledge, knew what she had e, and approved of it, and bestowed on her the boon that the Paurava monarchs might ever be virtuous and never be deprived of their thrones . Śakuntalā, after three years, brought forth a beautiful boy, for whom Kaṇva caused all the religious rites to be performed, and who, when he was only years of age, used to seize and bind to the trees lions, etc wherefore he was called Sarvadamana. Then Kaṇva caused his disciples to bring Śakuntalā and the boy to Hāstinapura and introduce them to Duṣyanta. Then they returned to the hermitage. Duṣyanta feigned not to remember anything. Then Śakuntalā became angry . Then she left his presence. But a voice from the sky commanded Duṣyanta to cherish his son, who should therefore be called Bharata. It was this voice of the Devadūta that Duṣyanta had waited for, that the people should not regard his son as of impure birth. Bharata reduced to subjection all the kings of the earth and became a sārvabhauma cakravartin, and performed many sacrifices with Kaṇva as the chief priest. From him has come the Bharata race, of whom the principal ones shall be mentioned .
Śala1, a serpent .
Śala2, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Śala3, son of Somadatta and brother of Bhūri and Bhūriśravas .
Śala4, son of king Parikṣit of Ayodhyā and the daughter of the frog king .
Śalabha1, an Asura .
Śalabha2, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Śalabha, pl. .
Śalabhī, a mātṛ. u, .
Śalāgraja = Bhūriśravas, q.v.
Śālagrāma = Viṣṇu, .
Śalahara, a serpent .
Śālakaṭaṅkaṭa .
Śāliśiras, a Devagandharva .
Śālihotra, a ṛṣi .
Śālihotrapitṛ = Kapila, .
Śālihotrasya tīrtha, a tīrtha .
Śālipiṇḍa, a serpent .
Śālisūrya, a tīrtha .
Śālmali1, son of Avikṣit .
Śālmali2, one of the seven dvīpas .
Śālmalikadvīpa .
Śalu, a river .
Śālūkinī, a tīrtha .
Śālva1, pl. .
Śālva2, pl a people .
Śālva3, name of one or more different princes . Some of these quotations may perhaps refer to Śālva4 .
Śālva4, lord of Saubha . Śālvapati, Śālvarāja, Saubhapati, Saubharāj, and the next.
Śālva5, lord of Saubha, a Daitya slain by Kṛṣṇa. b, . Daiteyāpasada, Mārttikāvataka nṛpa, Saubha, Saubhādhipati, Saubhapati, Saubharāj.
Śālvaka1, adj. .
Śālvaka2, pl. .
Śālvapati1 = Śālva4, .
Śālvapati2 = Śālva5, .
Śālvaputra, a prince .
Śālvarāja1 = Śālva3 .
Śālvarāja2 = Śālva4, .
Śālvarāja3 = Śālva5, .
Śālvarāja4 = Dyumatsena, .
Śālvaseni, pl a people .
Śālvāyana, adj. .
Śālveya, pl a people . Śālva, pl and the next.
Śālveyaka, pl a people .
Śalya, king of the Madras, brother of Mādrī, the wife of Pāṇḍu, and father of Rukmaratha ʹ, . also the following synonyms Ārtāyani, . Bālhīkapuṅgava, q.v. Madrādhipa, . Madrādhipati, . Madraja, . Madrajanādhipa, . Madrajaneśvara, . Madraka, . Madrakādhama, . Madrakādhipa, . Madrakeśvara, . Madrāṇām adhipa, . Madrāṇām īśvara, . Madrāṇām ṛṣabha, . Madrāṇāṃ vṛṣabha, . Madrapa, . Madrapati, . Madrarāj, . Madrarāja, . Madrarājan, . Madrarājeśvarātmaja, . Madreśa, . Madreśvara, . Sauvīra, q.v.
Śalyabhrātṛ .
Śalyānuja . Madrarājānuja.
Śalyaparvan1, the of the greater parvans of Mhbhr . c, .
Śalyaparvan2, the of the minor parvans of Mhbhr . Requested by Janame jaya, Vaiśampāyana related Duryodhanas grief at Karṇas slaughter, his resolution to continue the battle, his making Śalya the commander of the army that Śalya, having made a great carnage, was slain by Yudhiṣṭhira at midnight that Duryodhana fled away from the field, penetrated into a lake, and in the afternoon was summoned and slain by Bhīmasena, who had caused the lake to be encompassed by many warriors that Aśvatthāman, etc slaughtered the Pāñcāla troops in the night that Sañjaya, next morning, having set out from the camp, entered the city the grief of the citizens upon hearing Duryodhanas fall that Sañjaya informed Dhṛta rāṣṭra Dhṛtarāṣṭras, etc grief that Dhṛtarāṣṭra ordered Vidura to let the ladies and Gāndhārī retire, and was comforted by Vidura Dhṛtarāṣṭras lament and how he asked Sañjaya about the battle . Sañjaya begins his narration. The fear of the Kurus after the fall of Karṇa, and the state of the Kuru army Duryodhanas resolution to resist the victors Bhīma and Dhṛṣṭadyumna caused a great carnage Arjuna proceeded towards the car division Nakula, etc Śakuni, foot soldiers Arjuna they were slain by Dhṛṣṭadyumna and Bhīma the Kuru army broke and fled away Cekitāna, etc having slain a large number, blew their conchs Arjuna attacked the rest they fled Duryodhana the Pāṇḍavas Duryo dhana rallied his troops Duryodhana the Pāṇḍavas . Kṛpa urged Duryodhana to make peace Duryodhana refused . The troops were filled with enthusiasm they took up their quarters about two yojanas distant, and bathed in the Sarasvatī of red waters on the sacred and beautiful tableland at the foot of Himavat there they passed the night Śalya, etc and urged Yudhiṣṭhira to continue the battle. Duryodhana addressed Aśvatthāman, according to whose proposal Śalya was made genera lissimo Śalya promised to slay the foes . Śalya was anointed the troops became cheerful . Śalya resolved to slay or be slain . No one any longer felt any grief on account of Karṇa they slept that night happily and became very cheerful. Yudhiṣṭhira asked Kṛṣṇa his advice Kṛṣṇa praised Śalya, saying that he was equal to Bhīṣma, etc and superior to Śikhaṇḍin, etc. he thought only Yudhiṣṭhira was a match for Śalya, and urged him to slay him. After Kṛṣṇa had gone, Yudhiṣṭhira dismissed all his brothers and the Somakas and slept happily that night, and so did the Pāñcālas and the Pāṇḍavas, delighted with Karṇas fall . THE BATTLE OF THE FORENOON OF THE EIGHTEENTH DAY. After that night had passed away, the Kuru army, urged by Duryodhana, prepared for battle the leaders, Kṛpa, etc resolved to fight unitedly . Then, with Śalya at their head, they quickly proceeded against the foes. Similarly, the Pāṇḍavas. Asked by Dhṛtarāṣṭra about Śalyas slaughter by Yudhiṣṭhira and Duryodhanas by Bhīmasena, Sañjaya related Śalya proceeded with horses of the Sindhu breed yoked unto his chariot, at the head of the array, accom panied by the Madrakas and the sons of Karṇa enumeration of warriors on the left, on the right, in the rear, in the centre Śakuni and Ulūka surrounded by a large force of cavalry, etc. The mighty bowmen amongst the Pāṇḍavas divided themselves into three bodies, and rushed against the Kurus Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc against the army of Śalya Yudhiṣṭhira with his troops against Śalya alone Arjuna against Kṛtavarman and the Saṃśaptakas Bhīmasena, etc against Kṛpa Nakula and Sahadeva against Śakuni and Ulūka. Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya enumerated the relative strength of the two armies . The commencement of the battle a terrible slaughter on both sides. Arjuna and Bhīmasena stupefied their foes Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc Śalya Nakula and Sahadeva proceeded with speed the Kurus fled away . Śalya Yudhiṣṭhira Nakula Karṇas son Citrasena, whom he slew Nakula Citrasenas brothers Satyasena and Suṣeṇa Nakula slew Satyasena, mounted the chariot of Sutasoma, and slew Suṣeṇa. The Kurus were rallied by Śalya a great slaughter took place on both sides. Sātyaki, etc roared like lions, etc. The Kurus surrounded Śalya thither came Arjuna, having slaughtered the Saṃśaptakas, and the Pāṇḍavas headed by Dhṛṣṭadyumna . Śalya fought with great heroism against the troops of Yudhiṣṭhira portents appeared on earth and in the skies. Śalya Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. many were slain the Pāṇḍava army repaired to Yudhiṣṭhira Kṛtavarman, etc Bhīmasena, etc. Kṛtavarman Bhīmasena Kṛpa Dhṛṣṭadyumna Śakuni the Draupa deyas Aśvatthāman the twins Duryodhana Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna the Bhoja chief slew the brown steeds of Bhīmasena Śalya slew the steeds of Sahadeva, who then slew Śalyas son Kṛpa Dhṛṣṭadyumna Aśvatthāman the Draupadeyas once more the steeds of Bhīmasena were slain he crushed the steeds and chariot of Kṛtavarman, who fled away Śalya Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. Bhīma Śalya save Śalya or Rāma, none else can venture to encounter Bhīma save Bhīma, none can venture to encounter Śalya Kṛpa taking up Śalya on his own chariot, bore him away Bhīma had also been made senseless. The Kurus the Pāṇḍavas Duryodhana Cekitāna Kṛpa, etc Yudhiṣṭhira Duryodhana Dhṛṣṭadyumna Aśvatthāman Arjuna Śalya Candrasena Drumasena Yudhiṣṭhira Cedis, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira was worsted . Sātyaki and Bhīmasena, etc. Śalya Si etc were delighted Duryodhana regarded the Pāṇḍavas, Pāñcālas, and Sṛñjayas as already slain the Pāṇḍavas Śalya, who agitated the whole Pāṇḍava army . and G. wondered the Pāṇḍavas with Bhīmasena at their head and led by Yudhiṣṭhira did not fly . Arjuna Aśvatthāman and the Trigartas Arjuna destroyed, chariots Aśvatthāman the Pāñcāla Suratha, whom he slew Aśvatthāman and the Saṃśaptakas Arjuna . Duryodhana Dhṛṣṭadyumna Śikhaṇḍin the Prabhadrakas Kṛtavarman and Kṛpa Śalya the Pāṇḍavas Nakula Yudhiṣṭhira Śalya Yudhiṣṭhira, etc Śalya Śalya Bhīmasena Sātyaki Sātyaki Śalya . The Pāṇḍavas were afflicted by the Kurus . Arjuna Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman Sahadeva Śakuni Nakula cast glances on Śalya from the side the Draupadeyas checked numerous kings Śikhaṇḍin Aśvatthāman Bhīmasena Duryodhana Yudhiṣṭhira Śalya Śalya alone fought with the whole Pāṇḍava army Śalya Bhīma the Pāṇḍavas fled, disregarding the cries of Yudhiṣṭhira, who, summoning all his brothers and Kṛṣṇa, declared that after Bhīṣma, etc had been slain, Śalya only remained as his share the sons of Mādrī should be the protectors of his wheels Sātyaki would protect his right wheel and Dhṛṣṭadyumna his left, Arjuna his rear, Bhīma fight in his front. The Pāṇḍava troops rejoiced, especially the Pāñcālas, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira Śalya Bhīma Duryodhana Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc Śakuni, etc. Duryodhana was borne away by his steeds Aśvatthāman, etc followed him in order to rescue him the Kaurava troops became terrified Arjuna began to slay them Śalya was worsted by Yudhiṣṭhira the army of Duryodhana broke Aśvatthāman, taking Śalya up on his own chariot, fled away Śalya Yudhiṣṭhira Sātyaki, etc. the Pāṇḍavas, etc Śalya the Kurus surrounded Śalya at the command of Duryodhana Kṛpa slew Yudhiṣṭhiras charioteer, and Śalya his steeds Bhīmasena slew Śalyas charioteer and steeds and cut off his armour Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc Śalya Yudhiṣṭhira slew Śalya with a celestial dart . Śalyas younger brother Yudhiṣṭhira, who slew him the Kurus broke Sātyaki Kṛtavarman, whom Kṛpa carried away on his chariot Duryodhana alone withstood the Pāṇḍava leaders Kṛtavarman Kṛpa Yudhiṣṭhira Kṛtavarman was carried away by Aśvatthāman upon the latters chariot Kṛpa Yudhiṣṭhira. The Pārthas blew their conchs and applauded Yudhiṣṭhira . The followers of Śalya resolved to avenge him Duryodhana commanded them not to proceed to battle they, however, attacked Yudhiṣṭhira Arjuna, etc the Madrakas, whom they began to slaughter Duryodhana in vain tried to prevent them from fighting then, urged by Śakuni, he proceeded to the rescue of the Madrakas. The Pāṇḍavas arranged themselves in the form called Madhyama and slew the Madrakas meteors, etc were seen the Pārthas encountered a body of horse advancing towards them the Kuru army fled away . Also the sons of Dhṛta rāṣṭra almost all turned away from the fight at noon their fear was like to that after the fall of Bhīṣma, etc. the Pāñcālas and the Pāṇḍavas pursued them, and congratulated one another . The Sṛñjayas pursued the Kurus Arjuna the chariot division Nakula, etc Śakuni. Duryodhana rallied, foot soldiers, resisted by Bhīmasena and Dhṛṣ ṭadyumna Bhīma slew them Yudhiṣṭhiras troops in vain tried to transgress Duryodhana. Duryodhana rallied a small force by a spirited address the Pāṇḍavas, especially Arjuna, rushed against them Nakula, etc against Śakuni . The Mleccha king Śālva attacked the Pāṇḍavas, who fled Dhṛṣṭadyumna Śālva Dhṛṣṭadyumna had his chariot, steeds, and charioteer destroyed by the elephant Bhīma, etc Śālva the Pāñcālas, etc lamented Dhṛṣṭadyumna slew the elephant with his mace, and Sātyaki slew Śālva . Kṛtavarman, rallying a portion of the Kuru army, resisted the Pāṇḍavas Sātyaki king Kṣemakīrti, whom he slew Kṛtavarman Sātyaki the Pāṇḍavas, the Pāñcālas, etc became spectators Kṛpa carried Kṛtavarman away upon his chariot the whole army of Duryodhana fled except Duryodhana, who assailed all the Pāṇḍavas, etc. then Kṛtavarman came . Duryodhana alone resisted the Pāṇḍavas the Kuru army once more rallied and fought Duryodhana Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. Aśvatthāman Bhīma sena Śakuni Yudhiṣṭhira, who was carried away by Sahadeva on his chariot Yudhiṣṭhira Śakuni Si. and Cā. applauded Ulūka Nakula Kṛta varman Sātyaki Duryodhana Dhṛṣṭadyumna Kṛpa the Draupadeyas . The Kurus were broken by the Pāṇḍavas, but rallied by the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra Yudhi ṣṭhira Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman Duryodhana despatched chariots against Yudhiṣṭhira Śikhaṇḍin, etc came to aid Yudhiṣṭhira an awful battle ensued the were slain the Pāṇḍavas and Pāñcālas resisted terrifying omens in nature were seen. Śakuni exhorted the others to fight in front he would himself slay the Pāṇḍavas from behind the Madrakas rejoiced, but were slain Śakuni with, horsemen assailed the Pāṇḍava army in the rear the force of the Pāṇḍavas broke n. Yudhiṣṭhira urged Sahadeva to slay Śakuni, aided by the Draupadeyas Yudhiṣṭhira, with the Pāñcālas, would himself destroy the chariot force. Sahadeva the Draupadeyas Śakuni, who, with, horses, went away similarly, the Pāṇḍava force, which was reduced to, horses the Draupadeyas proceeded to Dhṛṣṭadyumna, Sahadeva to Yudhiṣṭhira Śakuni Dhṛṣṭadyumnas division after a terrible battle the Pāṇḍavas encompassed Śakuni . Śakuni exhorted the remainder of his following, horses, and urged Duryodhana to attack the Pāṇḍavas the remnant of the Kuru army attacked the Pāṇḍavas Arjuna addressed Kṛṣṇa, recounting the loss sustained by the Kurus, and attacked the remnant of the Kuru army, and caused a great slaughter . Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc the chariot force Duryodhana escaped on horseback to Śakuni, elephants encompassed the Pāṇḍava brothers, and were slain by Arjuna and Bhīma, etc. . Aśvatthāman, etc enquired about Duryodhana, pierced through Dhṛṣṭadyumnas force, and proceeded to Śakuni. The Pāṇḍavas, headed by Dhṛṣṭadyumna, assailed the Kurus. Sañjaya Dhṛṣṭadyumna Sātyaki Sañjaya, who was made captive Bhīma and Arjuna destroyed the elephants Aśvatthāman, etc seeking Duryo dhana, proceeded to Śakuni . Eleven sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra Durmarṣaṇa, etc Bhīmasena, who slew them. Bhīmasena then slew chariot warriors, foot, elephants, and horses . Duryodhana and Sudarśa were in the midst of the cavalry. Kṛṣṇa urged Arjuna to destroy the remnant of Duryodhanas troops Arjuna assented only horses form the remnant of the troops of Śakuni ... there remain also Aśvatthāman, etc. . Bhīmasena, etc Duryodhana Śakuni Dhṛtarāṣṭras son Sudarśana Bhīmasena Suśarman and Śakuni Arjuna Duryodhana Sahadeva. Arjuna the Trigartas Arjuna slew Satyakarman, Satyeṣu, and the Prasthala ruler Suśarman, and the latters thirty five sons, etc and then proceeded against the remnant of the Bharata host. Bhīma slew Sudarśana, and completed the destruction of the Kaurava army . Śakuni Sahadeva Ulūka Bhīmasena Sahadeva sat n on his chariot Bhīma and Sahadeva Śakunis men, who fled away, but were rallied by Duryodhana Sahadeva Nakula and Bhīma Śakuni Ulūka Sahadeva slew Ulūka Śakuni Sahadeva Śakunis division and Śakuni himself fled away, pursued by Sahadeva, who slew him .
Śalyaputra1 = Rukmaratha, q.v.
Śalyaputra2, .
Śalyasya putra = Rukmaratha, q.v.
Śama1 .
Śama2 .
Śama3, a king among the Nandivegas .
Śama4 = Viṣṇu .
Śamaśam = Śiva .
Śamaśama = Śiva .
Śamana = Śiva .
Śamaṭha, a brahman .
Śāmba1, son of Kṛṣṇa and Jāmbavatī . b Ś when still a boy, had routed the army of the Daitya Śambara and killed Aśvacakra, . b, . Jāmbavatīsuta, Jāmbavatyāḥ sutaḥ .
Śāmba2, a brahman .
Śambara, an Asura . b, . b, . Daitya, Dānavendra .
Śambarahan = Indra, q.v.
Śambara Pākahan = Indra, q.v.
Śambhalagrāma, v. S.
Śambhu1, an ancient king .
Śambhu2 = Brahmán, .
Śambhu3 = Viṣṇu, .
Śambhu4 = Śiva, .
Śambhu5, a fire .
Śambhu6, a Rudra .
Śambhu7, son of Kṛṣṇa and Rukmiṇī .
Śambuka. b, .
Śambūka, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Śamīka1, a muni, father of Śṛṅgin .
Śamīka2, a Vṛṣṇi . The right spelling of this and prec. is S.
Śampāka, a brahman .
Śamyu, a fire .
Śanaiścara1, the planet Saturn, son of Sūrya . b, . Sūryaputra.
Śanaiścara2 = Sūrya, .
Śānavatya, pl a people .
Śāṇḍilī, a goddess .
Śāṇḍilī, a brāhmaṇī .
Śāṇḍilya, a ṛṣi .
Śani = Śiva .
Śaṅkara1 = Śiva, q.v.
Śaṅkara2, a Viśvedeva .
Śaṅkaraśvaśura = Himavat, .
Śaṅkarṣaṇa, error in C. for Saṅkarṣaṇa, q.v.
Śaṅkha1, a serpent .
Śaṅkha2, son of the Matsya king Virāṭa and brother of Uttara .
Śaṅkha3, an ancient ṛṣi, brother of Likhita .
Śaṅkha4, a Daitya .
Śaṅkha5, a treasure .
Śaṅkha6, a prince .
Śaṅkhabhṛt = Viṣṇu .
Śaṅkhacakragadādhara = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Śaṅkhacakragadāhasta = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Śaṅkhaśiras, a serpent . next.
Śaṅkhaśīrṣa, a serpent . the prec.
Śaṅkhakumbhaśravas, a mātṛ. u, .
Śaṅkhalikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Śaṅkhamekhala, a ṛṣi .
Śaṅkhamukha, a serpent .
Śaṅkhapada, son of Manu Svārociṣa. b
Śaṅkhapiṇḍa, a serpent .
Śaṅkhatīrtha, a tīrtha on the Sarasvatī. f Here Baladeva beheld a gigantic tree, Mahāśaṅkha, tall as Meru, looking like Śvetaparvata, and resorted to by many Ṛ. there dwell Y Vd Rā Pś and Si in thousands all of them, abaning other kinds of food, observe vows and regulations, and take at due seasons the fruits of that tree for their sustenance, and wander unseen by men, .
Śaṅkhinī, a tīrtha .
Śaṅku, a Vṛṣṇi .
Śaṅkukarṇa1, a serpent .
Śaṅkukarṇa2, son of Janamejaya .
Śaṅkukarṇa3, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Śaṅkukarṇa4 = Śiva .
Śaṅkukarṇeśvara, a tīrtha .
Śānta1, son of the Vasu Ahas .
Śānta2 = Śiva .
Śānta3 = Viṣṇu, .
Śāntā, daughter of the Aṅga king Lomapāda and wife of Ṛṣyaśṛṅga .
Śāntabhaya, an ancient king .
Śāntanava1 = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Śāntanava2 = Citrāṅgada, .
Śāntanava3, pl the descendants of Śāntanu .
Śāntanoḥ putra, Śantanoḥ suta = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Śāntanu, son of Pratīpa and father of Bhīṣma, Citrāṅgada, and Vicitravīrya . b, . f, . b, . Bhārata, Bhāratagoptṛ, Bharatasattama, Kauravya, Kurusattama, Prātīpa.
Śāntanuja = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Śāntanunandana = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Śāntanūpākhyāna . The rājarṣi Pratīpa spent many years in ascetic penances at the source of Gaṅgā. She sat upon his right thigh and wished him to be her husband. He replied that the left lap was for the wife, but the right for the daughters and daughters in law therefore he accepted her for his son, to which Gaṅgā consented on the condition that his son should not be able to judge of the propriety of her acts. Then Pratīpa, along with his wife, engaged in ascetic austerities from desire of offspring, and when they had grown old, Mahābhiṣa was born as a son to them and was called Śāntanu, because his father had controlled his passion . When Śāntanu had grown to become a youth, Pratīpa told him about his appointment with the celestial damsel, installed him upon the throne, and retired into the woods. Śāntanu, who was addicted to hunting, one day came upon the banks of Gaṅgā, frequented by Siddhas and Cāraṇas, and there he requested Gaṅgā, in the form of a lovely maiden, to become his wife .
Śāntanusuta = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Śāntatama = Śiva .
Śantātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śānti1, an Indra .
Śānti2, a ṛṣi. c, .
Śānti3, son of Aṅgiras. b, .
Śānti4 = Viṣṇu .
Śāntida = Viṣṇu .
Śāntiparvan, the twelfth book of Mhbhr . c, .
. b . Bhīṣma said Once B. ṛ. and Ṛ. ṛ. proceeded to the western Prabhāsa, and resolved to visit all the sacred waters on earth there were Śukra, etc and Indra they reached Kauśikī on the day of full moon in the month of Māgha, and then Brahmasaras, where they gathered and ate the stalks of the lotus Agastyas stalks had been taken away he complained of the increasing unrighteous ness, and thought of going to heaven in order not to live to see yet worse things the Ṛ. took, each of them, the most frightful oaths to their own innocence but Indra uttered a benediction instead of a curse, and confessed that he had stolen the stalks, not from cupidity, but from desire of hearing what Ṛ. would say. Agastya forgave him. Then they pro ceeded to other tīrthas .
Śara = Śiva .
Śarabha1, a serpent .
Śarabha2, a serpent .
Śarabha3, an Asura .
Śarabha4, a ṛṣi .
Śarabha5, son of Śiśupāla . Śiśupālasuta.
Śarabha6, brother of Śakuni .
Śarabha7 = Viṣṇu .
Śarabha, pl a people .
Śarabhaṅga, a ṛṣi .
Śāradaṇḍāyanī, a kṣatriya wife. c When appointed by her husband to raise offspring, Ś. went out in the night and waited at a spot where four roads met, and having performed the puṃsavana rite had three sons by a brahman, .
Śaradvat1, a ṛṣi . Janamejaya said Tell me the birth of Kṛpa. Vaiś. said The maharṣi Gotama had a son Śaradvat, born with arrows. Ś. studied the Dhanurveda in preference to the Vedas, and by his austerities he came to master all weapons. Indra was afraid of him, and sent the devakanyā Jānapadī to disturb him. He fled from her but from his seed that had fallen upon a clump of reeds sprung two children, whom a soldier found and brought to king Śāntanu. Śāntanu, from pity, brought them up as his own children, whence he called them Kṛpa and Kṛpī. Ś. by his tapas learnt what had happened and came to Śāntanu and told him his lineage, etc. He then instructed Kṛpa in the fourfold Dhanurveda and various śāstras, and in a short time Kṛpa became an eminent teacher, who instructed the Dhārtarāṣṭras, Pāṇḍavas, Yādavas, Vṛṣṇis, and other princes from various countries in the Dhanurveda, . Gautama.
Śaradvat2 = Kṛpa, .
Śaradvat3, pl .
Śāradvata = Kṛpa, q.v.
Śāradvatasūnu, .
Śāradvatī, an Apsaras .
Śāradvatī = Kṛpī, .
Śāradvatīputra = Aśvatthāman, . .
Śāradvatīsuta, = Aśvatthāman, .
Śaradvatsuta = Kṛpa, .
Śaraṇa1, a serpent .
Śaraṇa2 = Viṣṇu .
Śaraṇya1 = Śiva, . Do. = Sūrya, .
Śarāsana, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Śarastamba, a tīrtha. b, By bathing in the waterfalls at Ś Kuśastamba, and Droṇaśarmapada, one becomes worshipped by Apsarases.
Śarava, pl v. Śabara.
Śaravanālaya = Skanda, .
Śaravanodbhava = Skanda, .
Śarāvatī, a river in Bhāratavarṣa .
Śārdulī .
Śarin = Śiva .
Śarīrabhṛt = Viṣṇu .
Śarīrabhūtabhṛt = Viṣṇu .
Śarmaka, pl a people .
Śarman = Viṣṇu .
Śarmin, a brahman .
Śarmiṣṭhā, daughter of the Asura king Vṛṣaparvan and the second wife of Yayāti . b, . also the following synonyms Asurendrasutā, . Asurī, . Vārṣaparvaṇī, .
Śārṅga, the bow of Kṛṣṇa . f Ś. is said to have been in the possession of Viṣṇu it was held by Kṛṣṇa, who obtained it, baffling the nooses of Muru and slaying that Asura, and vanquishing Naraka while recovering the earrings set with gems, with, girls, etc .
Śārṅgacakragadādhara = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Śārṅgacakragadāpāni = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Śārṅgacakrāsipāṇi = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Śārṅgadhanurdhara = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Śārṅgadhanvan1 = Kṛṣṇa, q.v. Do. = Viṣṇu .
Śārṅgagadāpāṇi = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Śārṅgagadāsipāṇi = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Śārṅgakopākhyana . Janamejaya said Why did the śārṅgakas escape Vaiśampāyana said When the maharṣi Mandapāla, who was an ūrdhvaretas, had finished his tapas, he left his body and went to Pitṛloka, but did not obtain the expected result of his acts, and learned from the gods sitting around Dharmarāja that it was because he had no offspring. He then reflected how he could obtain numerous offspring in the shortest time possible he learnt that the birds were peculiarly prolific, and, becoming a śārṅgika, he married the śārṅgikā Jaritā, and begat upon her four sons, who were all reciters of the Vedas. Then he left her and married Lapitā. When Agni came to the forest of Khāṇḍava to burn it n, Mandapāla praised Agni and prevailed upon him to spare his children . Jaritā told her sons, who would have her to rescue herself by abaning them, to conceal themselves in the hole of a mouse but they were afraid of the mouse . Finally Jaritā was prevailed upon by her sons to aban them, and Agni approached the spot where the sons were . The four young ṛṣis praised Agni, who promised them safety and granted them a boon. Droṇa asked him to consume the cats that troubled them every day . Mean while Manda pāla addressed Lapitā, being anxious about his children. Lapitā, from jealousy, told him to go to Jaritā, who, she said, was the real cause of his anxiety. When Agni had spared the children, Jaritā came and embraced them. When Mandapāla came they did not speak to him, and Jaritā, from jealousy, told him to go to Lapitā. Mandapāla declared that nothing was so destructive to the happiness of women as a concubine, except a lover witness Arundhatī . Then all his children came forward to worship him, and he also spoke kindly to them all . Mandapāla told that he had asked Agni to protect them, and therefore he had not come earlier. Then he took his wives and sons with him and went away to some other country .
Śārṅgarava, a brahman .
Śārṅgin = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Śaru, a Devagandharva .
Śarva1 = Śiva, q.v.
Śarva2 = Viṣṇu .
Śarvāṇī = Umā, .
Śarvarīkara = Viṣṇu .
Śaryāti, an ancient king, son of Manu Vaivasvata . b At the sacrifice of Ś. Indra drank soma with the Aśvins, and Cyavana paralysed Indra and obtained Sukanyā, . b, . g, .
Śaryātitanayā = Sukanyā, .
Śaryātivana, a place .
Śāstṛ = Viṣṇu .
Śatabalā, a river .
Śatabhiṣā, a nakṣatra .
Śatacandra, a Kuru warrior .
Śataśīrṣā, wife of Vāsuki, king of the serpents .
Śataśṛṅga, a mountain . b, .
Śatadhanvan1, a prince. b, .
Śatadhanvan2, a prince .
Śatadru, a river, the modern Sutlej . b, . next.
Śatadrukā = Śatadru .
Śatadyumna, an ancient king .
Śataghaṇṭā, name of a spear .
Śataghaṇṭā, a mātṛ. u, .
Śataghnin = Śiva .
Śataghnīpāśaśaktimat = Śiva .
Śatajihva = Śiva .
Śatajyotis .
Śatakratu1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Śiva .
Śatakratuprastha = Indraprastha, .
Śatakumbhā, a river .
Śatalocana, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Śatamanyu = Indra, .
Śatamāya, an Asura .
Śatamukha, an Asura. f Dhātṛ created the great Asura Ś who for a hundred years sacrificed the flesh of his own body into the sacrificial fire. Gratified by this, Śiva granted him yoga and eternal power, .
Śatamūrti = Viṣṇu .
Śatānana = Viṣṇu .
Śatānanda1, a ṛṣi .
Śatānanda2 = Viṣṇu .
Śatānandā, a mātṛ. u, .
Śatānīka1, son of Nakula Pāṇḍava and Draupadī . also the following synonyms Nakuladāyāda, . Nakulasya sutaḥ, . Nakulātmaja, . Nākuli, .
Śatānīka2 .
Śatānīka3, a rājarṣi of the Kuru race .
Śatānīka4, brother of the Matsya king Virāṭa .
Śatañjayā, v. Śatruñjayā.
Śataparvā, the wife of Śukra .
Śatapatha, i.e. Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa . b, brāhmaṇa mukhe, a passage is quoted, Nīl. to the next verse
Śataratha, an ancient king .
Śatarudra, a hymn = Śatarudriya .
Śatarudriya, a certain hymn of the Yajurveda . b, . g, . d, .
Śatasahasraka, a tīrtha .
Śatasāhasraka, a tīrtha .
Śatasahasrāṃśu = Soma, .
Śatāvarta1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Śatayūpa, a Kaikeya prince. b The R. ṛ. Śatayūpa had been the king of the Kekayas having made over sovereignty to his son he had come into the woods, .
Śatāyus1, son of Purūravas .
Śatāyus2, a Kuru warrior, always mentioned together with Śrutāyus .
Śaṭha, an Asura .
Śatodara = Śiva .
Śatodarī, a mātṛ. u, .
Śatolūkhalamekhalā, a mātṛ. u, .
Śatru, v. Krodhaśatru.
Śatrughna1, son of Daśaratha .
Śatrughna2 = Viṣṇu .
Śatruhan = Śiva .
Śatrujetṛ = Skanda, .
Śatrujit = Viṣṇu .
Śatrundama = Śiva .
Śatruñjaya1 .
Śatruñjaya2, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Śatruñjaya3, brother of Karṇa .
Śatruñjaya4, a Kuru warrior .
Śatruñjaya5, son of Drupada .
Śatruñjaya6, a Kuru warrior .
Śatruñjaya7, a Sauvīra king . b, .
Śatruñjayā, a mātṛ. u, .
Śatruntāpa, a Kuru warrior .
Śatrusaha, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Śatrutāpana1, an Asura .
Śatrutāpana2 = Viṣṇu .
Śatruvināśana = Śiva .
Śaunaka1, a descendant of Bhṛgu, at whose sacrifice Ugraśravas recited the Mhbhr . b, . c, . Bhārgava, Bhārgavottama, Bhṛguśārdūla, Bhṛgūdvaha, Bhṛgukulodvaha, Bhṛgunandana.
Śaunaka2, a ṛṣi .
Śaunaka3 = Indrota, .
Śaunaka4. b, . Śaunaka1.
Śaunakottama = Śaunaka1, .
Śauṇḍika, pl a people .
Śauri1, son of Śūra = Vasudeva, .
Śauri2, descendant of Śūra = Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva, q.v.
Śauri3, = Balarāma, .
Śauri4, = Sātyaki, .
Śauri5 = Sūrya, .
Śauri6 = Viṣṇu .
Śavala, Śavalāśva, Śavalākṣa, v. Śab.
Śavara, pl v. Śabara.
Śaya = Sūrya, .
Śaya, pl a people .
Śayamāna = Śiva .
Śayita = Śiva .
Śeṣa, the serpent who carries the earth = Ananta . Ś. left his mother Kadrū and practised hard penances on Gandhamādana, in Badarī, Gokarṇa, the woods of Puṣkara, on the foot of Himavat, in order to be emancipated from his body and avoid companionship with his brothers. Brahmán prevailed upon him to pass through a crevice and support the earth, and gave him Suparṇa to help him, . b In con sequence of his ascetic austerities Ś. is able to support the earth he has, heads his tongues are blazing like flames of fire, and he is endued with great strength, . d, . b, . c, . Ananta.
Śibi1, a king, son of Uśīnara . Questioned by the Pāṇḍavas about the greatness of the rājanyas, Mārkaṇḍeya related Suhotra, one of the Kurus, on his return from a visit to the great ṛṣis, met Śibi Auśīnara seated on his chariot each of them regarding himself to be the equal of the other, refused to give way. Nārada appeared and prevailed upon Suhotra to give way, quoting three ślokas and declaring Śibi to be superior, . Mārkaṇḍeya tells the history of Śibi Auśīnara being tried by Indra and Agni, . King Ś. Auśīnara girded the earth round himself as if it were a leathern girdle, per formed many sacrifices, etc and acquired enormous wealth Śiva granted him the boon that his wealth, etc should be inexhaustible. Then he left this world for heaven, . b, . b, . b, . Auśīnara, Śaibya8.
Śibi2 = Uśīnara, .
Śibi3, an Asura .
Śibi4, name of an Indra .
Śibi5, a prince who sided with Yudhiṣṭhira .
Śibi, pl a people . e, .
Śibiputra = Gopati, .
Śibisūnu = Vṛṣādarbha, .
Śiśira1 .
Śiśira2 = Viṣṇu .
Śiśu1 .
Śiśu2 = Skanda, .
Śiśumāra, name of a star or constellation .
Śiśumāramukhī, a mātṛ. u, .
Śiśupāla, king of the Cedis, son of Damaghoṣa . b, . b In order to enhance the fame and honour of the Pāṇḍavas, Keśava formerly smote Ś who was honoured by the Karūṣa king, etc. Then the other kings, deeming Kṛṣṇa unassailable when seated on his chariot, left the chief of the Cedis and ran away, . . b, . also the following synonyms Caidya, Cedīnām adhipaḥ, Cedipa, Cedipati, Cedipuṅgava, Cedirāj, Cedirāja, Cedivṛṣa, q.v. Śrautaśrava, metron . Damaghoṣasuta, . Damaghoṣātmaja, .
Śiśupālasuta1 = Dhṛṣṭaketu, .
Śiśupālasuta2 = Śarabha, .
Śiśupālātmaja = Dhṛṣṭaketu, .
Śiśupālavadha = Śiśupālavadhaparvan .
Śiśupālavadhaparvan . As Yudhiṣṭhira was afraid that his sacrifice might be obstructed, Bhīṣma consoled him, saying that Kṛṣṇa was invincible . Śiśupāla again censured Bhīṣma and Kṛṣṇa, and compared Bhīṣma to the old swan, who always preached of virtue, so that the other birds gave him food and kept their eggs with him but the old swan used to eat up their eggs, till he was found out and slain . Śiśupāla censured Kṛṣṇas behaviour towards Jarāsandha Bhīma rushed up in anger, but was restrained by Bhīṣma, while Śiśupāla was boasting . Bhīṣma said Śiśupāla was born with three eyes and four hands, and brayed like an ass his parents resolved to aban him, but were prevented by an incorporeal voice who foreboded that that man in whose lap the child would be sitting, when its superfluous arms would fall n and the third eye on its forehead disappear, should be its slayer. Though the child was placed upon the laps of, kings, this came not to pass until Rāma and Kṛṣṇa went to the capital of the Cedis to see their fathers sister, when the boy was placed on the lap of Kṛṣṇa then the arms fell n and the eye disappeared. Kṛṣṇa granted to Śiśupālas mother the boon that he would par offences of Śiśupālas . Bhīṣma declared that Kṛṣṇa himself had wanted to provoke the boast of Śiśupāla. Śiśupāla reproached Bhīṣma because he did not rather praise the other kings, such as the Bālhika king Darada, or Karṇa, etc. he compared Bhīṣma to the bird Bhūliṅga . Bhīṣma expressed his contempt for such talk. The kings became angry and proposed to kill Bhīṣma, who relied upon Kṛṣṇa . Śiśupāla challenged Kṛṣṇa, being desirous to slay him with all the Pāṇḍavas. Kṛṣṇa related how Śiśupāla, hearing that the Sātvatas had gone to Prāgjyotiṣa, came and burnt Dvārakā that when king Bhoja was sporting on the Raivataka hill, he fell upon his attendants and slew many of them and led many away in chains to his own city in order to obstruct the sacrifice of Kṛṣṇas father, he stole the sacrificial horse that had been let loose under the guard of armed men that he ravished the reluctant wife of Babhru on her way from Hāstinapura to the Sauvīras that disguising himself in the attire of the Kārūṣa king, he had ravished Bhadrā Vaiśālī that he had desired Rukmiṇī, but failed to obtain her that he had promised to par him times, and that the number had now become full. Kṛṣṇa then thought of his discus, which came into his hand therewith he instantly cut off the head of Śiśupāla the kings beheld a fiery energy issuing out of the body of Śiśupāla and entering Kṛṣṇas body the sky, though cloudless, poured showers of rain, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira caused his brothers to perform the funeral rites of Śiśupāla, the son of Damaghoṣa then he, with all the kings, installed the son of Śiśupāla in the sovereignty of the Cedis v. Rājasūyikaparvan.
Śiśuroman, a serpent .
Śīghra = Skanda, .
Śīghrā, a river .
Śīghraga = Sūrya, .
Śikhaṇḍin1, son of the Pāñcāla king Drupada, and father of Kṣattradeva ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, . also the following synonyms Bhīṣmahantṛ, . Bhīṣmanihantṛ, . Śikhandinī, . Draupadeya, q.v. Drupadātmaja, q.v. Pāñśalya, q.v. Yājñaseni, q.v.
Śikhaṇḍin2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śikhaṇḍin3 = Śiva, .
Śikhaṇḍin4 = Viṣṇu
Śikhaṇḍinī, v. Śikhaṇḍin1.
Śikhanditanaya = Kṣattradeva, .
Śikhāprokta, said of Pañcaśikha, .
Śikhāvarta, a Yakṣa .
Śikhāvat, a ṛṣi .
Śikhin1 = Agni, q.v.
Śikhin2, a serpent .
Śikhin3 = Śiva, .
Śikṣaka, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Śīladhārin = Śiva .
Śilāyūpa, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Śilin, a serpent .
Śilpika = Śiva .
Śilpināṃ śreṣṭhaḥ = Śiva .
Śineḥ pautra, Śineḥ putra = Sātyaki, q.v.
Śineḥ suta = Satyaka, q.v. Do. = Sātyaki, q.v.
Śiner naptṛ = Sātyaki, q.v.
Śini1, father of Satyaka and grandfather of Sātyaki . e Atri Soma Budha Purūravas Āyus Nahuṣa Yayāti Yadu ...Devamīḍha Śūra Vasudeva in Śūras race was born Ś. About this time the svayaṃvara of Devakas daughter Devakī took place, whom Ś. took up in his chariot for the sake of Vasudeva. Somadatta attacked Ś who threw him to the earth, seized him by the hair and struck him with his foot, and then let him off. Śiva granted Somadatta that he should have a son who should in like manner strike Ś.s son with his foot, .
Śini2, pl the race of Śini, a family or tribe . Śinipravara, Śinipravīra, Śinipuṅgava, Śini putra, Śinivīra = Sātyaki, q.v.
Śipiviṣṭa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śirīṣaka, a serpent .
Śirohārin = Śiva .
Śīrṣin, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Śiṣṭakṛt = Viṣṇu .
Śiṣṭeṣṭa = Viṣṇu .
Śita, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Śītā, a river, v. Sītā.
Śītāṃśu, Cītaraśmi = Soma, q.v.
Śītapūtanā, a female demon .
Śītavana, v. Sītavana.
Śitikaṇṭha1 = Śiva, q.v.
Śitikaṇṭha2, a serpent .
Śitikeśa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Śitiprabha = Viṣṇu, .
Śītoṣṇakṣujjarādhidhṛk = Śiva .
Śiva1, the great god, husband of Umā Brahmaṇaḥ sutaḥ, had promulgated the Pāśupata system Brahma Rudra saṃv. Caturvaktrasya i.e. Brahmáns lalāṭa prabhavaḥ putraḥ, discourse between him and BrahmánĀnuśāsanik.had been gratified by Kṛṣṇa at Badarī in order to obtain a son from the grace of Ś Kṛṣṇa repaired to the hermitage of Upamanyu on HimavatUpamanyu enumerates the boons granted by Ś. to Hiraṇyakaśipu, etc.UpamanyuUpamanyu relates how Ś. showed himself to him and granted him boonsĀnuśāsanik.Kṛṣṇa by his penances succeeded in seeing Ś whom he praised Taṇḍin succeeded in seeing Ś whom he praisedŚivānāṃ Śivaḥ, Upamanyu recited to Kṛṣṇa the, names of Ś which had been uttered by Brahmán and communicated to Upamanyu by TaṇḍinVyāsa, etc had obtained boons from Ś. conclusion of Upamanyus discourseĀnuśāsanik.divaś cyutā cirasāptā Śena Gaṅgā, cf .Suvarṇotpatti Ś. assumed the form of Varuṇa and performed a sacrifice, in which Bhṛgu, Aṅgiras, and Kavi arose from the seed of Brahmán, etc. b, .Ānuśāsanik.declaring that he would recite the Śatarudriyadescriptionwith his footof the sacrificial offeringsof iron, silver, and gold respectivelyŚiva Śiva, = Agni, lightning, and Sūrya= Righteousness, water, and the moonfirethe moon upa sthānaṃof the same name, why he is so calledSaṃvartta MaruttīyaŚ. resides on Muñjavat, enumeration of his names Guruśiṣyasaṃv.paśūnām īśvaraḥMahābhāratasya bhavanehusband of Ambikā, i.e. Umāwho deprived Kāma of his bodyslayer of AndhakaPage2 b names2etymologyslayer of Bhagadestroyer of Bhagas eyesthe friend of Kuberasya, sc. āyatanaṃ, visited by Yudhiṣṭhira on his tīrtha yātrāmantraṃ Bhproktaṃmayaṃ jagatonly B the verse is missing in C. after v etymology of the nameworshipped by Kṛṣṇa and Arjunaall. to Kairāta parvancakre sārathyaṃ Bhsya Prapitāmahaḥ, all. to Tripurākhyānaall. to Kairātaparvancame to see the encounter between Karṇa and Arjunasayujyam āgatāḥ names1 names2among the ViśvadevasānucarāḥPCR. proposes to read Bhagaghna names2also, Mahadevaṃ, all. to KairātaparvanJarā sandha sacrifices human beings to Ś.cf. BrahmánDevadevaṃKirātarūpīeṇa Tripuraṃ, all. to Tripurākhyānaall. to Kairātaparvanworshipped in ŚākadvīpaRudrāṇāṃ Śaṅkaraś cāsmi, says Kṛṣṇa about himselfnṛtyantam iva Śṃ darśanaṃ Śsya, all. to Kairātap.sthānaṃghorām Śnirmitāṃ, sc. aśaniṃsarvabhūteṣv anujñātaḥ Śeṇa, sc. Arjunaall. to Kairātap.ād ūrdhvaṃ nānyaṃ paśyāmi daivataṃSurāsuragurau names2sannidhau, Brahmán sung the names of ŚivaUmā had performed austerities on Himavat in order to become the wife of Ś.Himavat was the father in law of Ś.priyakṛc Chsya, i.e. Skandasyomayā sārdhaṃ saṃvādaṃsyomaya sārdhaṃ saṃvādaḥmay be seen at Vātika khaṇḍa at the end of every yugarepetition of Kairātap.all. to Jayadrathavimok ṣaṇap.all. to Kairātap. names1Tridaśeśvaraḥ names2asṛjat prajāḥtā, origin of the name Nārāyaṇa seized Śiva by the throat, which became darkorigin of the name from the mark of Nārāyaṇas hand on Śivas throatBrahmaṇaḥ sutaḥtā, origin of the name Indra hurled his thunderbolt at Śiva, whose throat was scorchedarmed with the tridentbhūt, C.ivaŚambhuḥto be worshipped at Vaitaraṇīrepetition from Kairātaparvansthānaṃ ...Śeḥ, i.e. Gokarṇaall. to Kairātap.ivaivais appointed chief of the Rudrasratyarthaṃ bhavatāṃ hy eṣā i.e. Draupadī nirmitā Śnāiṃ, acc.viṣāṇaṃ Śḥdestroyer of Dakṣas sacrifice names1 names2etymology names2 names1ḥhusband of GaurīPage2 b dear to Gaurīs heartMahādevaṃ, all. to Kairātaparvanhaving a bull as his markhaving a bull in his bannerhaving the excellent bull as his vehiclegranted Gāndhārī sonsBhaganetraharaṃRudraṃ, etc.tulyaparākramaḥ, i.e. Rāma Jāmadagnyarepetition from JayadrathavimokṣaṇaparvanŚivaḥyathāvṛṣodaragātra samadyutiḥ, sc. the moonetymologyBrahma HādiṣuViśveśaṃ names2sya bhāryā, i.e. Gaṅgātulyāmbaradharā, sc. Umātulyaparākramāḥsaśūlam iva Hṃwearing matted locks names1 names2who destroyed the body of Kāmancarrying human skullsiṃ, acc. names2sutāṃidentified with NārāyaṇaRudraḥ names2clad in skinsfather of Kumāra, i.e. Skandahaving an eye on his foreheadthe great godKirātavapuṣākṛtyāṃāntakābhyāṃ, Aśvatthāman was born from a part of Mahādeva, etc.Śaṅkaraṃ, all. to Kairātap.Sthāṇuḥ, how he got four facesall. to Kairātap.in the palace of Kuberasahomaḥ, in the palace of BrahmánPage2 a Umāpatiṃ, worshipped by JarāsandhaRudraṃall. to Kairātap.prasādāc ca gāṇapatyañ ca vindate, sc. by bathing in Rudravaṭa B. Bhadravaṭato be worshipped at Rudrapada to be worshipped at Mṛgadhūmato be worshipped at the tīrtha Narakato be worshipped at Śālagrāmaon Śrīparvatain Jyeṣṭhasthānato be worshipped at Muñjavaṭain Brahmasarasrepetition from Kairātap.sagaṇaḥTripurārdanaṃKirāta veśmapracchannah, all. to Kairātap.Giriśaṃatra i.e. in the north Gaṅgāṃ Mḥ patantīm gaganāc cyutāṃ pratigṛhya dadau loke mānuṣeall. to Kairātap.granted a boon to Somadattaall. to Kairātap.etymologyŚiva became endued with the half of the united energy of the gods, and from that time he was called Mahādevaall. to Kairātap.Śivaḥ, Rudrātgratified by ArundhatīViśvarūpaḥsacrificed himself at the sarvayajñagave weapons to Rāma JāmadagnyaĪśānaṃ, was made lord of the RudrasŚivaḥPrajāpatiḥŚūlapāṇiḥ, slew the Asuras with the swordPaśupatiṃgratified by Vyāsa, Śiva granted him the son Śukaperformed austerities on the mountain Ādityaparvataconsoled Vyāsa after the death of Śukajagatsraṣṭā names2to be worshipped in the hermitage of the Kṛttikāsmade the bull which was given to him by Dakṣa his vehicle and bannerassumed the form of Varuṇa and performed a sacrificeGaṅgāyāś ca durutsahāṃ mūrdhnā dhārāṃ Mahādevaḥ śirasā yām adhārayatidentified with Kṛṣṇa Rantidevaṃetymologythe great Lordśaroddhūtaṃ papāta Tripuraṃ yathāaṣṭa mūrtinā, all. to Kairātap.worshipped in Daminto be worshipped on Devikā at GaṅgāhradaNīlakaṇṭhātrepetition from Kairātap.na spṛśanti grahā bhaktān narān devaṃ Mṃfather of SkandaŚivam ity eva yaṃ prāhur Īśaṃ Rudraṃ Pitāmahaṃ bhāvais tu vividhākāraiḥ pūjayanti Mṃthe Dānavas had formerly obtained Duryodhana from Maheśvarasakhaṃ, i.e. Kuberasamaṃ krodhe, sc. Bhīmasamaḥ krodhe, sc. Bhīmaon Himavatyathāall. to Kairātap.slew the Daityas with the Pāśupata weaponPage2 b jaghana...Maheśvara ivāndhakaṃall. to Tripurākhyānasamo yudhiall. to Tripurākhyānaetymologyyathā Brahmā Maheśvaraṃ, sc. acted as charioteer tokecit Msutaṃ vadanti, sc. SkandaBrahma Viṣṇu Maheśvaraiḥpraṇītaś ca Purāṇe niścayaṃ gataḥ, sc. the sword names1granted to Vyāsa the son Śukaprotected Bāṇa, but was vanquished by KṛṣṇaDevadeva, identified with Nārāyaṇaprasādena, v PCR. has MādhavaDevadevātViśvarūpaḥ names2sya tristhāne, a tīrtha on the spot where Gaṅgā flows in a northward directionheld Gaṅgā on his headperformed austerities surrounded by cowsdis courses about kineetymologyin Vārāṇasīsuraśreṣṭhaṃslayer of Mahiṣadestroyer of sacrifice names2sya mūrttiṃmahākāyo grāmaṇīr Vṛṣa bhadhvajaḥhaving a dark neck names1origin of the name Śiva swallowed the poison Kālakūṭa, then his throat became darkorigin of the name Nārāyaṇa seized Śiva in the throat, which became dark names2Rudrānāṃ Nīlalohitaḥa festival in honour of him at Vāraṇāvatain the palace of Kuberaer gṛhe, Jarāsandha kept the vanquished kingsPer iva, sc. samājehad given the Pāśupata weapon to Arjuna, all. to Kairātap.on Meruetymologygave Skanda an army of bhūtas named Dhanañjayānyapātayat ...paśūn Pair yathāorigin of the nameetymologyarmed with the bow Pinākaivaiva names2yathāPage2 a ivaivaiṃ, acc.iṃ, acc.ivaivaplur.ivadestroyer of Prajāpatis sacrificeḥmāhālmyaṃyathaiva bhagavān Rudro viddhvā yajñamṛgaṃsyānucaraḥ śrīmān Mahākālaḥ, i.e. Bāṇalokeṣu sendra RudreṣuJarāsandha sacrificed the vanquished kings to Rudraidentified with Kṛṣṇato be worshipped at Daminat Rudrakoṭiworshipped by Viṣṇu at the tīrtha Suvarṇākhyaat Śālagrāmahad obtained Brahmaśiras and given it to Arjunasya, sc. āyatanaṃ, visited by Yudhiṣṭhira on his tīrthayātrāDevadevāyayathā Rudrāc ca sambhūtaḥ, sc. Skanda= Agni, C but B. has Rudram Agnimukhāṃ SvāhāṃRudram Agniṃ dvijāḥ prāhū, Rudrasūnus tatas tu saḥ, sc. Skanda, the son of AgniRudreṇa śukram utsṛṣṭaṃ tac Chvetaḥ parvato bhavatanupraviśya Rudreṇa vahniṃ jāto hy ayaṃ śiśuḥ, i.e. Skandapuruṣeṣu yathā Rudras tathāryā pramadāsv apiMiñjikāmiñjikaṃ mithunaṃ Rudrasambhavaṃsya śūlaḥ, named Vijayasya paṭṭiśaḥanvadhāvad mṛgaṃ Rāmo Rudras tārāmṛgaṃ yathāall. to Kairātaparvanhad given Arjuna the Raudra weaponparākramaḥ, i.e. Arjunareme...yathā Rudraś ca Rudrāṇyāṃvaton MeruPinākam iva Rudrasyavatpātayiṣyāmi Rudraḥ paśugaṇān ivaākrīḍa iva Rudrasya ghnataḥ kālātyaye paśūnlokeṣu sendra Rudreṣuall. to Jayadrathavimokṣaṇaparvangranted Śibi imperishable wealthJayadrathaḥ varadānena Rudrasyahad given a weapon to Arjunasyākrīḍa sadṛcaḥākrīḍanam iva Rudrasyanyahan Rudraḥ paśūn ivaŚakrāntakopamaṃopendravikramaḥ, sc. Aśvatthāmanall. to Kairātap.opendravikramaḥ, sc. Karṇaaśanīṃ Rnirmitāṃsya nighnataḥ paśūn yathābhaktaḥ Keśavaḥ Rsaṃbhavaḥetymologykṛtvā mahāyuddhaṃ ...yathā Rudreṇa cāndhakaḥsyākrīḍasannibhaṃdaṇḍaḥkalpaḥ, sc. Śalyaavadhīt ...Rudraḥ paśūn ivaivanighnataḥ sarvabhūtāni Rudrasyevarūpaṃ Ropendrasamaṃivasyākrīḍasannibhaṃsyākrīḍanaṃ yathāvyapothayata...Rudraḥ paśūn ivasasarja...Rudro ndhakāyāntakaraṃ yatheṣuṃyathātulyabalaiḥfriend of Kuberaivaākrīḍanibhaṃtanayaḥ, i.e. chastisementMuñjapṛṣṭhaḥ...Rudrasevitaḥthe eighth son of BrahmánṚṣabhaketavetulyā gaṇāḥif the soul escapes through the breast, one goes to RudraViśvarūpasyaon Merukrodhajaḥdevakrodhād viniḥsṛtaḥcreated ten other Rudrasson of Brahmán, issued from the forehead of Brahmánidentified with NārāyaṇaDakṣa caused a third eye to appear on the forehead of Rudrawooed Umāhis encounter with Nara and NārāyaṇaDevadevaṃDevadevenasyāyatanaṃmade the bull given to him by Dakṣa his vehicle and bannerŚūlapāṇiḥsya retaḥ praskannam agnau, whence arose SkandaĪśasyaidentified with Agnikanyābhiḥdevarṣi kanyābhiḥānala Vasuprabhāḥ, sc. ṛṣayaḥsaṅkāśāḥ ...Brahmalaukikāḥmahāetymologyhaving a bull for his bannerB. has often ŚarvaB. CB. ŚB. Cetymology names1B. Ś names2B. Ś, identified with AgniB. Ścame out from the primordial eggfather of the eleven Rudrasat Bindusaras, in the palace of Indraekādaśatanuḥos tīrthaṃ, i.e. Rudravaṭa or BhadravaṭaMuñjavaṭaṃ nāma Sthāṇoḥ sthānaṃYogeśvaraḥ, at Pañcavaṭior mantrāṇi, are to be recited at Puṣkaraall. to Kairātaparvanat BindusarasetymologyĪśānaṃŚūladhṛkor vṛṣasya sadṛśaṃ, sc. Aśvatthāmanperformed austerities at SthāṇutīrthaŚivaḥŚivaḥŚivaḥ names1aṣṭādaśabhujaṃ names2oḥ sthāneetymologyPage2 a armed with the tridenteḥ sthānaṃ, on Devikāhaving three eyes names1 names2destroyer of Tripura names1having three eyespl i.e. the PāṇḍavasŚiva created a third eye on his forehead names1in the palace of Kuberarepetition from Kairātap.all. to Kairātaparvanyathāsampra jahrāte pureva Tāndhakaujaghāna...pureva To ndhakaṃall. to v. foll.etymologyyudhyasva Tenāndhako yathāworshipped by DroṇaKṛṣṇa identified with T. names1granted Vyāsa the son ŚukaBrahmaṇā saha saṃvādaṃ Tsya names1 names2husband of UmāViśveśvaraṃ, in the tīrtha Narakaworshipped in GokarṇaViśveśvara Uḥ Kāmam abhivartamānam anaṅ gatvena śamam anayat names2on Muñjavatcomposed the śāstra Vaiśālākṣa names2 names1RudraṃHaraṃUmāpatiṃbhūta mātṛgaṇādhyakṣaṃHaraḥ names1Page2 b having a bull in his bannerorigin of the namehaving a bull as his markhaving a bull as his vehicle= Vṛṣabhadhvajaacted as the calf when the puṇyajanāḥ milked the earth= = Vṛṣabhāṅka= VṛṣabhavāhanaRemarks. Besides the above synonyms, numerous epithets of Śiva of minor importance are found in hymns or descriptions of him scattered about in the Mahābhārata especially the following passages, . names1 ṃ= Śiva, names1Dakṣaprokta Śivasahasranāmastotraso B.pl.rṃso B.bhogināṃB. has Ghanaupamaḥpl.ṃṃṃB. goptaPage2 a C. has dundabhiśḥC. ṃṃpl.ḥC. has āśramaṃyajuṣāṃḥpl.yantrāṇāṃso B.ḥe, dat.hB. sṛso B. instead of Anaupama in C.C. has by error Dhpl.Page2 b ṃpl.ṃḥpl.B. reads kālaḥ puso C.so B.ṃṃṃpl.ṃB. nāsapl.ḥB. has Rudraṃpl.ḥḥḥṃmaṅgalānāṃso C.so B.ṃpl.pl.pl.namo namaḥṃpl.pl.pl.ḥpl.pl.B. stutiṃpavitrāṇāṃhṛdayañ ca Pḥ, sc. tePage2 a ḥḥonly B C. has Kṣudrapl.pl.sadā cākṣapl.pl.C. valāpl.ḥḥṃṃvratānāṃe, dat.pl.patatāṃṃso B.ṃso C.pl.so B.so C.pl.C. has by error Uābhijāḥpl.praharaṇānāṃpl.only C B. has Varuṇae, dat.pl.only B C. has Varadaḥonly B.Page2 b B. kaku si tvaṃ, Vṛṣa, Vṛṣaskhandha, Vṛṣya, Vyādhayaḥ, Vyādhi, Vyādhihan, Vyādhīnām āgama, Vyāghra, Vyaktāvyakta, Vyālayajñopavītin, Vyāna, Vyavasāya, . Yajin, Yajña, Yajñādhipa, Yajñamṛgavyādha, Yajñavāha, Yajurmaya, Yakṣādhipapriya, Yama, Yuga, Yugāvarta, Yuvan, . Mahādevasahasranāmastotra, the, names of Śiva, which were originally uttered by Brahmán and afterwards by Taṇḍin b . The names are the following, alpha betically arranged Abhigamya, Abhirāma, Abhivādya, Acalopama, Acintya, Aśanin, Āśramapūjita, Āśramastha, Aśva, Aśvattha, Adambha, Adhana, Adharṣaṇa, Adhiroha, Adhyātmānugata, Ādi, Ādikara, Adīna, Aditi, Āditya, Ādya, Ādyastuti, Agama, Agnijvāla, Agravara, Ahaścara, Ahas, Ahirbudhnya, Ahorātra, Aja, Ajaikapād, Ajita, Akāśani, Akara, Akṣa, Akṣara, Alola, Amara, Amareśa, Ambujāla, Aṃśu, Amita, Amitrajit, Amogha, Amoghārtha, Amṛta, Amukha, Amukhya, Anagha, Anala, Anantarūpa, Anauṣadha, Aṅgalubdha, Anila, Anilābha or Nilābha, Animiṣa, Anindita, Anīti, Antarātman, Antarhitātman, Anukārin, Apara, Apsarogaṇasevita, Ardana, Ārdracarmām baravṛta, Ārohaṇa, Artha, Arthakara, Aryaman, Asāhaya, Asamāmnāya, Asat, Āṣāḍha, Asnehana, Atandrita, Atharvaśīrṣa, Atidhūmra, Atidīpta, Ativṛddha, Ātman, Ātmanirāloka, Ātmasahāya, v. Ātman Ātmasambhava, Atri, Atryānamaskartṛ, Atulya, Avaśa, Avara, Āveśa, Āvedanīya, Avyakta, Avyaya, Āyu, Āyudhin, . Babhru, Bahubhūta, Bahu dhānindita, Bahudhara, Bahukarkaśa, Bahula, Bahumāla, Bahuprada, Bahu prasāda, Bahuraśmi, Bahurūpa, Bahu vidya, Bakula, Bala, Balacārin, Balahan, Balarūpadhṛk, Balavat, Balavīra, Balin, Bāṇahasta, Bandhakartṛ, Bandhana, Bandhana asuren drāṇāṃ, Bhagahārin, Bhāgakara, Bhagavat, Bhāgin, Bhaktānāṃ paramā gatiḥ, Bhasmabhūta, Bhasmāśaya, Bhasmagoptṛ, Bhava, Bhāva, Bhāvana, v. Sabhāvana Bhikṣu, Bhikṣurūpa, Bhīma, Bhojana, Bhūtabhāvana, Bhūtacārin, Bhūtālaya, Bhūtaniṣevita, Bhūtapati, Bhūtavāhanasārathi, Bījādhyakṣa, Bījakartṛ, Bījavāhana, Bindu, Brahmacārin, Brahmadaṇḍavinirmātṛ, Brahma garbha, Brahmakṛt, Brahmaloka, Brahmán, Bráhman, Brāhmaṇa, Brahmavarcasa, Brahmavid, . Cala, Camūstambhana, Candana, Candanin, Candra, Candravaktra, Carācarātman, Carmin, Cāruliṅga, Caturmukha, Catuṣ patha, Cekitāna, Chada, Chandas, Chattra, Cīravāsas, Śaśin, Śāśvata, Śakra, Śakta, Śani, Śaṅkara, Śara, Śaraṇya, Śarva, Śataghnin, Śataghnīpāśacaktimat, Śata jihva, Śatruhan, Śatruvināśana, Śikhaṇḍin, Śikhin, Śīladhārin, Śirohārin, Śiva, Śmaśānabhāj, Śmaśānavāsin, Śobhana, Śrīmat, Śrīvardhana, Śriyāvāsin, Śṛgālarūpa, Śṛṅgapriya, Śṛṅgin, Śubhākṣa, Śuci, Śuddha, Śuddhātman, Śukla, Śvetapiṅgala, . Daśabāhu, Daityahan, Dakṣa, Dakṣayāgāpahārin, Dakṣiṇa, Damana, Dambha, Daṇḍin, Darpaṇa, Deha, Deva, Devadeva, Devādhipati, Devarṣi, Devasiṃha, Devāsuragaṇāśraya, Devāsuragaṇādhyakṣa, Devāsuragaṇāgraṇī, Devāsuraguru, Devāsura mahāmātra, Devāsuramaheśvara, Devāsura namaskṛta, Devāsuraparāyaṇa, Devāsurapati, Devāsuravaraprada, Devāsuravinirmātṛ, Devāsureśvara, Devatātman, Devātideva, Devendra, Dhanvantari, Dhanvin, Dhara, Dharmasādharaṇa, Dharottama, Dhar ṣaṇātman, Dhātṛ, Dhruva, Dhṛtimat, Dhūmaketana, Dhūmaketu, Digvāsas, Dīnasādhaka, Dīrgha, Durvāsas, Dvādaśa, . Gabhasti, Gajahan, Gama, Gambhīra, Gambhīrabalavāhana, Gambhīraghoṣa, Gaṇa, Gaṇakāra, Gaṇakartṛ, Gaṇapati, Gaṇḍalin, Gandhadhārin, Gandhapālin, Gandharva, Garbhacārin, Gatāgata, Gati, Gautama, Gavāṃ pati, Ghora, Ghoratapas, Giriruha, Girisādhana, Gocara, Gocarmavasana, Gopāli, Gopati, Govṛṣeśvara, Graha, Grahapati, Grāma, Guha, Guhāpāla praveśināṃ, Guhāvāsin, Guhya, Guṇabuddhi, Guṇādhika, Guṇākara, Guṇauṣadha, Guru, . Haima, Hara, Harasulocana, Hari, Harikeśa, Hariṇa, Hariṇākṣa, Haryaśva, Haryakṣa, Hastīśvara, Havis, Hayagardhabhi, Hemakara, Himavadgirisaṃśraya, Hiraṇyabāhu, Hiraṇyakavacodbhava, Hlādana, Huta, Hutāśana, Hutāśanasahāya, . Ī, Īśāna, Īśvara, Īḍya, Indriya sarvadehināṃ, Itihāsa, . Jagat, Jagatkāla, Jahnavīdhṛk, Jaleśaya, Jalodbhava, Jaṅgama, Janya, Jaṭādhara, Jatin, Jita, Jitakāma, Jitendriya, Jīvana, Jvālin, Jyotiṣām ayana, . Kāhali, Kailāsagirivāsin, Kakubha, Kāla, Kalāḥ, Kālakataṅkata, Kālapūjita, Kālayogin, Kali, Kalpa, v. Sakalpa Kāma, Kāmanāśaka, Kamaṇḍaludhara, Kāmāri, Kanaka, Kāñcanacchavis, Kaniṣṭha, Kānta, Kapālavat, Kāpālin, Kapardin, Kapila, Kapiśa, Karasthālin, Karmakālavid, Karman, Karṇikāramahāsragvin, Kartṛ, Kāṣṭhāḥ, Ketu, Ketumālin, Khacara, Khaḍgin, Khaga, Khalin, Krama, Kriyāvastha, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇapiṅgala, Kṛṣṇavarṇa, Kṣaṇāḥ, Kṣapāḥ, Kulāhārin, Kūlakṛt, Kuṇḍin, Kūpa, Kurubhūta, Kurukartṛ, Kuruvāsin, . Laghu, Lalā ṭākṣa, Lambana, Lambitoṣṭha, Lavāḥ, Lavaṇa, Laya, Liṅga, Liṅgādhyakṣa, Lohitākṣa, Loka, Lokacārin, Lokadhātṛ, Lokahita, Loka kartṛ, Lokapāla, . Madana, Madhu, Madhukalocana, Madhyama, Mahābala, Mahābīja, Mahādaṃṣṭra, Mahādanta, Mahādeva, Mahādhanu, Mahādhātu, Mahāgarbha, Mahā garbhaparāyaṇa, Mahāghora, Mahāgīta, Mahāgrīva, Mahāhanu, Mahāharṣa, Mahāhasta, Mahājaṭa, Mahājatru, Mahājihva, Mahājvāla, Mahākalpa, Mahākambu, Mahākarman, Mahākarṇa, Mahākartṛ, Mahākāya, Mahākeśa, Mahāketu, Mahākrodha, Mahākṣa, Mahāliṅga, Mahāmāla, Mahāmātra, Mahāmāya, Mahāmeghanivāsin, Mahāmukha, Mahāmuni, Mahāmūrdhan, Mahānāda, Mahānāgahana, Mahānakha, Mahānana, Mahānāsa, Mahānetra, Mahāṅga, Mahānṛtya, Mahāntaka, Mahāpāda, Mahāpatha, Mahāprasāda, Mahāratha, Mahāretas, Mahārṇavanipānavid, Mahāroman, Maharṣi, Mahārūpa, Mahāsena, Mahat, Mahātapas, Mahātejas, Mahātman, Mahauṣada, Mahāvakṣas, Mahāvega, Mahāyaśas, Mahāyudha, Maheśvara, Mahīcārin, Mahoraska, Mahoṣṭha, Makara, Mālin, Māndhātṛ, Maṇividdha, Manojava, Manovega, Manthāna, Mantra, Mantrakāra, Mantravid, Mānya, Māsa, Matimat, Mātrāḥ, Mātṛ, Māyāvin, Meḍhraja, Merudhāman, Mitra, Mokṣadvāra, Mṛdu, Mṛgabāṇārpaṇa, Mṛgālaya, Mṛta, v. Amṛta Muhūrtāḥ, Mukhya, Muktatejas, Mudita, Mūla, Muṇḍa, Muṇḍin, Muni, Mūrdhaga, Mūrtiga, . Nabhaḥsthala, Nabhas, Nābhi, Naikasānucara, Naikātman, Nakṣatrasādhaka, Nakṣatravigrahamati, Nakta, Naktañ cara, Nandana, Nandī, Nandīśvara, Nandikara, Nandin, Nandi vardhana, Nara, Nararṣabha, Nartaka, Navacakrāṅga, Niśācara, Niśācārin, Niśākara, Niśālaya, Nidhi, Nigraha, Nihantṛ, Nija, Nīla, Nilābha, Nīlakaṇṭha, Nīlamauli, Nilaya, Nimitta, Nimittastha, Nipātin, Nīraja, Nirāmaya, Nirava graha, Nirgama, Nirjīva, Nirvāṇa, Nīti, Nitya, Nityanarta, Nivedana, Nivṛtti, Niyama, Niyamāśrita, Niyamendriya vardhana, Niyata, Nṛtyapriya, Nyagrodha, Nyāyanirvapana, . Pāśa, Paśupati, Pāda, Padmagarbha, Padmanābha, Padmanālāgra, Pakṣa, Pakṣarūpa, Pakṣin, Paṇavin, Paṇḍita, Para, Para, Parā gati, Paraśvadhāyudha, Parama Bráhma, Parama tapas, Paramātman, Paramo mantra, Paridhīpatikhecara, Paryaya, Pati, Paṭṭiśin, Pavitra, Payonidhi, Pinākadhṛk, Pitāmaha, Pītātman, Pitṛ, Prabhāva, Prabhāvātman, Prabhu, Praśāntātman, Pradhānadhṛk, Prāgdakṣiṇa, Prajābīja, Prajādvāra, Prajāpati, Prakāśa, Prakṛṣtāri, Pramāṇa, Prāṇadhāraṇa, Prāsānāṃ prabhava, Prasāda, Prasanna, Praskandana, Pratyaya, Pravara, Pravṛtti, Prayatātman, Preta cārin, Priya, Puṇyacañcu, Purāṇa, Puṣkarasthapati, . Rājarāja, Raktāṅga, Rathayogin, Rati, Ratnaprabhūta, Raudrarūpa, Ravi, Rudra, Ṛṣasahasrā mitekṣaṇa, Ṛtu, . Sabhāvana, Sādhyarṣi, Sagaṇa, Saha, Sahasrabāhu, Sahasrada, Sahasrahasta, Sahasrākṣa, Sahasramūrdhan, Sahasrapād, Sahāya, Sakala, Sakalpa, Samāmnāya, Samaramardana, Samāsya, Sambhagna, Sampanna, Samudra, Saṃvatsara, Saṃvatsarakara, Saṃyata, Saṃyoga, Saṃyugāpīḍavāhana, Saṅgraha, Sāṅkhyaprasāda, Saṅkhyāsamāpana, Saphalodaya, Sāra grīva, Sāraṅga, Sarga, Sarpacīra nivāsana, Sarva, Sarvabandhavimocana, Sarvabhāvakara, Sarvabhāvana, Sarva bhūtahara, Sarvabhūtātman, Sarvacārin, Sarvāśaya, Sarvāśraya, Sarvaśubhaṅkara, Sarvada, Sarvadeva, Sarvadevamaya, Sarvadhārin, Sarvaga, Sarvagandhasukhāvaha, Sarvajña, Sarvakāla prasāda, Sarvakāma, Sarvakāmada, Sarvakāmaguṇāvaha, Sarvakāmavara, Sarvakara, Sarvakarman, Sarvalakṣaṇalakṣita, Sarvalālasa, Sarvalocana, Sarvalokakṛt, Sarvalokaprajāpati, Sarvāṅga, Sarvāṅga rūpa, Sarvapārśvamukha, Sarvapāvana, Sarvapūjita, Sarvaratnavid, Sarvasādhana, Sarvasādhuniṣevita, Sarvātman, Sarvātodya parigraha, Sarvatomukha, Sarvatūryaninādin, Sarvavāsa, Sarvavāsin, Sarvavigraha, Sarvavikhyāta, Sarvayogin, Sarvāyudha, Sarveṣāṃ prāṇināṃ pati, Sat, Satkṛta, Satyavrata, Savitṛ, Senākalpa, Senāpati, Ṣaṣṭibhāga, Siddhabhūtārtha, Siddhārtha, Siddhārthakārin, Siddhasādhaka, Siddhayogin, Siddhi, Siṃhaśārdūlarūpa, Siṃhadaṃṣṭra, Siṃhaga, Siṃhanāda, Siṃhavāhana, Skanda, Snehana, Soma, Sruvahasta, Sthāṇu, Sthāvarāṇāṃ pati, Sthira, Stuta, Subala, Subandhanavimocana, Subāndhava, Subīja, Suchattra, Suśārada, Sudarśana, Sugandhāra, Suhṛdaḥ, Sukhājāta, Sukhāsakta, Sūkṣma, Sūkṣmātman, Sumahāsvana, Sumukha, Suniścala, Suparvaṇa, Surabhi, Surādhyakṣa, Suragaṇa, Surārihan, Surūpa, Sūrya, Susaha, Susaṅkṣepa, Susaraṇa, Suṣāḍha, Susvapna, Sutīkṣṇadaśana, Sutīrtha, Suvaktra, Suvarcasa, Suvarcasin, Suvarṇa, Suvarṇaretas, Suvāsa, Suvijñeya, Suyukta, Svarbhānu, Svargadvāra, Svastibhāva, Svastida, Svayambhuva, Svayambhūta, Svayaṃśreṣṭha, . Tala, Tāla, Tālin, Tāmroṣṭha, Tapaḥsakta, Tapasvin, Tapomaya, Taponidhi, Tāraṇa, Taraṅgavid, Tārkṣya, Taru, Tejas, Tejaskara, Tejopahārin, Tigmamanyu, Tigmatejas, Tīkṣṇatāpa, Tīrthadeva, Teraṇa, Trāsana, Triśaṅku, Triśukla, Tridaśa, Trijaṭa, Trikakud, Trikāladḥṛk, Trilocana, Trinetra, Trivikrama, Triviṣṭapa, Triyuga, Tryakṣa, Tumbavīṇa, Tvaṣṭr, . Udagra, Udbhid, Ugra, Ugratejas, Umādhava, Umākānta, Umāpati, Unmattaveśapracchanna, Unmāda, Upaśānta, Upadeśakara, Upakāra, Ūrdhvaśāyin, Ūrdhvagātman, Ūrdhvaliṅga, Ūrdhvaretas, Ūrdhvasaṃhanana, Uṣaṅga, Uṣṇīṣin, Utsaṅga, Uttamaḥ sarvakarmāṇāṃ, Uttaraṇa, . Vācaspatya, Vaśakara, Vaśīkara, Vaśya, Vaḍavāmukha, Vadha, Vāhitṛ sarvabhūtānāṃ, Vaiśravaṇa, Vaidambha, Vaidya, Vaiṇavin, Vājasana, Vajrahasta, Vajrin, Vāma, Vāmadeva, Vāmana, Vaṃśa, Vaṃśakara, Vaṃśanāda, Vaṇija, Vapus, Vara, Varada, Varāha, Varcasvin, Vardhakin, Vardhana, Vareṇya, Varṇavibhāvin, Vāsava, Vasu, Vasu śreṣṭha, Vasuvega, Vāta, Vātaraṃhas, Vāyu, Vāyuvāhana, Vedakāra, Vibhāga, Vibhāgajña, Vibhu, Vibudha, Viśāṃ pati, Viśākha, Viśāla, Viśālaśakha, Viśālākṣa, Viśārada, Viśāravid, Viśva, Viśvabāhu, Viśvadeva, Viśvakarmamati, Viśvakṣetra, Viśvarūpa, . Vidhātṛ, Vidvat, Vijaya, Vijaya kālavid, Vijayākṣa, Vikhyāta, Vikṛta, Vikurvaṇa, Viṃarṣa, Vimocana, Vimukta, Vinata, Vipaṇa, Viraja, Virāma, Virūpa, Visarga, Viṣaṇṇāṅga, Viṣkambhin, Viṣṇu, Viṣṇuprasādita, Viṣvaksena, Vistara, Vistāra, Vivasvat, Vratādhipa, Vṛddha, Vṛkṣa, Vṛkṣākāra, Vṛkṣakarṇasthiti, Vṛkṣa ketu, Vṛṣarūpa, Vṛṣaṇa, Vṛttāvṛttakara, Vyāghra, Vyākaraṇottara, Vyakta, Vyaktāvyakta, Vyālarūpa, Vyāsa, Vyavasāya, . Yaśas, Yajña, Yajñabhāgavid, Yajñahan, Yajñapati, Yajñāri, Yajñasamāhita, Yajuḥ pādabhuja, Yoga, Yogādhyakṣa, Yogakara, Yogin, Yojya, Yugādhipa, Yugarūpa, Yugāvaha, Yukta, Yuktabāhu, .
Śiva2, name of a lac house .
Śiva3, a fire .
Śiva4 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śiva5, pl. . b, .
Śivā, wife of the Vasu Anila .
Śivā, wife of Aṅgiras .
Śivā, a brāhmaṇī .
Śivā, a river .
Śivakarṇī, a mātṛ. u, .
Śivapura .
Śivi1, Śiviputra, Śivisūnu, so C. for Śib, q.v.
Śivodbheda, name of a place .
Śmaśānabhāj = Śiva .
Śmaśānavāsin = Śiva, .
Śobhana = Śiva .
Śobhanā, a mātṛ. u, .
Śokanāśana = Viṣṇu .
Śoṇa, a river .
Śoṇāśva, Śoṇāśvavāha, Śoṇahaya = Droṇa, q.v.
Śoṇitabhṛt = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śoṇitoda, a Yakṣa .
Śraddhā, daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Dharma .
Śraddhā, daughter of Vivasvat. b, .
Śrāddhadeva1 = Manu, .
Śrāddhadeva2 = Vivasvat, .
Śrāddhaparvan, the section relating to the Śrāddha, the of the minor parvans of Mhbhr . Kṛṣṇa censured Gāndhārī, saying that this vast carnage had taken place by her fault, through her son Duryodhana and told her not to grieve . Gāndhārī remained silent. Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Yudhiṣṭhira said that one billion, men had fallen and, had escaped the fallen had all attained to regions like those of Indra . Yudhiṣṭhira said that in the forest he had obtained the gift of spiritual vision from . ṛ. Lomaśa. Urged by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Yudhiṣṭhira ordered Sudharman, etc to cause the funeral rites of the slain to be duly performed they burned them upon funeral pyres the Pitṛmedha rites were performed for some of the illustrious dead by the noise of sāmans, ṛcs, and lamentations all creatures became stupefied that night. Then Yudhiṣṭhira and Dhṛtarāṣṭra proceeded towards the Gaṅgā . The Kuru ladies, etc performed the water rites for their fellow kinsmen at the Gaṅgā. Kuntī, in a paroxysm of grief, disclosed the truth about Karṇas birth to her sons. The Pāṇḍavas grieved, and Yudhiṣṭhira lamented, hearing that Karṇa was his elder brother . Yudhiṣṭhira caused Karṇas wives, etc to be brought before him, and with them performed the water rite in honour of Karṇa .
Śramaṇa = Viṣṇu .
Śrautaśrava = Śiśupāla, .
Śrāva, king of Ayodhyā .
Śravaṇa, a nakṣatra . . g, .
Śrāvaṇa .
Śravaṇaja, adj. . b, jā sṛṣṭir Brahmaṇaḥ
Śravas, a ṛṣi. b, .
Śrāvastaka, king of Ayodhyā .
Śrāvastī, a city .
Śreṇimat, a king .
Śreṣṭha1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Śreṣṭha śreyasāṃ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śreyas = Viṣṇu .
Śrī, the goddess of beauty and prosperity . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . p, . Lakṣmī, Padmā.
Śrīśa = Viṣṇu .
Śrīda = Viṣṇu .
Śrīdhara = Viṣṇu, .
Śrīgarbha = Viṣṇu .
Śrīkaṇṭha = Śiva, .
Śrīkara = Viṣṇu .
Śrīkuṇḍa, a tīrtha .
Śrīkuñja, a tīrtha .
Śrīmadrājapura, a city, the capital of the Kāliṅga king Citrāṅgada .
Śrīmat1, son of Nimi .
Śrīmat2 = Śiva .
Śrīmat3 = Viṣṇu .
Śrīmatāṃ varaḥ = Viṣṇu .
Śrīmatī, a mātṛ. u, .
Śrīnidhi = Viṣṇu .
Śrīnivāsa = Viṣṇu .
Śrīpadma = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śrīpañcamī, a certain lunar .
Śrīparvata, a mountain .
Śrīpati = Viṣṇu .
Śrīvāha, a serpent .
Śrīvardhana = Śiva .
Śrīvāsa1 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu .
. b Bhīṣma said Nārada, who through his penance beholds both this and the other world at once, etc wandered through the three worlds. Once at dawn he performed his ablutions in the Gaṅgā, and so did Indra. They listened to the narratives told by the great . ṛ. They hymned the rising Sun, and then in the opposite direction beheld a luminous object riding on Viṣṇus vehicle aned with Garuḍa and Sūrya it was Śrī with many Aps. her names Padmā, etc. . She said that they had formerly dwelt with the Asuras in consequence of her disposition to be bound by truth and merit seeing, however, that the Asuras had assumed perverse natures, she had left them and wished to reside with Indra. Requested by Indra, she told that she had dwelt with the Asuras on account of their good behaviour, but after they had fallen off from virtue, she had deserted Dai. and Dā. and had come to Indra there where reside, the seven other goddesses and Jayā as the eighth, who love me, etc desire to live all of them and myself, having deserted As have come to thee. . ṛ Nārada, and Indra gave her a hearty welcome. Vāyu, the friend of Agni, began to blow gently all the deities assembled heaven began to shower nectar upon the region of Brahmán, etc. Indra began to pour rain no one deviated from the path of righteousness, etc. K Y Ra. became cheerful, etc. .
Śrīvatsa, the curl of hair on the breast of Viṣṇu, .
Śrīvatsavakṣas = Viṣṇu .
Śrīvibhāvana = Viṣṇu .
Śrīyāvāsin = Śiva .
Śrutaśravas1, a ṛṣi .
Śrutaśravas2, a rājarṣi .
Śrutaśrī, a Daitya .
Śrutaśruvas, v. Śrutaśravas1.
Śrutadhvaja, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Śrutāhvaya, v. Śrutāyus4.
Śrutakarman1, son of Sahadeva and Draupadī . Śrutasena3, Draupadeya.
Śrutakarman2, son of Arjuna and Draupadī . Śrutakīrti.
Śrutakarman3, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Śrutakīrti, son of. Arjuna and Draupadī . Ārjuni, Śrutakarman2, Draupadeya.
Śrutānīka, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Śrutānta, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Śrutarvan1, a king .
Śrutarvan2, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Śrutasena1, brother of Janamejaya Pārikṣita .
Śrutasena2, a serpent.
Śrutasena3, son of Sahadeva and Draupadī . Śrutakarman1.
Śrutasena4, a Daitya .
Śrutasena5, a Kuru warrior .
Śrutasoma, v. Sutasema.
Śrutavat, v. Śrutarvan2.
Śrutāvatī, daughter of Bharadvāja. y, . the viprarṣi Bharadvāja saw the Apsaras Ghṛtācī, then his vital seed came out. He caught it in his hand, and then kept it in a funnel of a leaf from that seed was born a girl, whom he in the presence of . and R. called Ś. Keeping the girl in his hermitage, Bharadvāja repaired to the forest of Himavat, .
Śrutāyudha1, king of the Kaliṅgas . Śrutāyus2, Kaliṅga, Kāliṅga, Kaliṅgādhipati, Kaliṅgaka.
Śrutāyudha2, a king .
Śrutāyu, king of the Ambaṣṭhas . Ambaṣṭha, Ambaṣṭhapati.
Śrutāyus2 = Śrutāyudha, the Kaliṅga king . Śrutāyus1.
Śrutāyus3, brother of Acyutāyus . Śrutāyus1.
Śrutāyus4, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Śrutāyus5, a Kuru warrior .
Śruti, an ancient king .
Śrutisāgara = Viṣṇu .
Śrutivarman, a Kuru warrior .
Śṛgāla, a king .
Śṛgālarūpa = Śiva .
Śṛṅga, a mountain = Śṛṅgavat. i
Śṛṅgapriya = Śiva .
Śṛṅgavat, a mountain .
Śṛṅgavera, a serpent .
Śṛṅgaverapura, a city .
Śṛṅgin1, son of Śamīka .
Śṛṅgin2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Śubhā, v. Subhā.
Śubhakarman, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Śubhākṣa = Śiva .
Śubhānana = Skanda, .
Śubhāṅga = Viṣṇu .
Śubhāṅgada, a king .
Śubhāṅgī, a Dāśārha princess, the wife of Kuru .
Śubhavaktrā, a mātṛ. u, .
Śubhekṣaṇa = Viṣṇu .
Śuci1, a month .
Śuci2, a ṛṣi .
Śuci3, name of a caravan leader .
Śuci4, a fire .
Śuci5 = Sūrya, .
Śuci6 = Skanda, .
Śuci7 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śuci8, a son of Vicvāmitra. b, .
Śuci9 = Śiva .
Śuci1, a son of Bhṛgu. b, .
Śuci1 = Viṣṇu .
Śuciśravas = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śucikā, an Apsaras .
Śucipada = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śuciṣmitā, an Apsaras .
Śucisravas = Viṣṇu .
Śucivrata, an ancient king .
Śuddha = Śiva .
Śuddha, pl a class of gods .
Śuddhātman = Śiva .
Śūdra, pl a people, mostly mentioned together with the Abhīras .
Śūdra2, pl. = Śiva .
Śuka1, son of Vyāsa . ee, . b, . c, . Āraṇeya, Araṇīsuta, Dvaipāyanātmaja, Vaiyāsaki, Vyāsātmaja.
Śuka2, a Rākṣasa, a counsellor of Rāvaṇa .
Śuka3, name of a weapon .
Śuka4, a Gandhāra warrior, the son of Subala .
Śuka, pl parrots .
Śukābhipatana, . Hearing the words of Nārada, Śuka understood that great misery follows the acquisition of children and wives, and that one has to undergo great labour in order to acquire science and Vedic lore. He resolved to attain to the highest end, that is fraught with the greatest felicity, and whence there is no return into the ocean of births that cannot be attained without yoga shall therefore have recourse to yoga, and throwing off this body shall become transformed into wind and enter the Sun for he s not wane like the Moon with the gods when after death one enters the moon he falls to earth and thence ascends to heaven with the great Ṛṣis shall enter the energy of the Sun declare before all the creatures... earth, ... Dā G Pś U Rā and R that shall enter all creatures in the world. Obtaining Nāradas per mission, Śuka went to Vyāsa, who asked him to stay there for the day that he might behold him for some time. But Śuka, only intent on emancipation, immediately left him and proceeded to Kailāsa, which was inhabited by crowds of ascetics . Having reached the summit of Kailāsa, Śuka set himself to practise yoga . Having then obtained the permission of Nārada, he soared into the skies and identified himself with the element of wind Aps G R etc wondered. Śuka proceeded in silence, his face turned towards the east, regarding the sun then to the Malaya mountain Urvaśī and Pūrvacitti, who always dwell on Malaya, wondered. Śuka asked the gods, etc to return his father an answer from him, if he should repeatedly call on him . Śuka freed himself of the four kinds of faults, the eight kinds of tamas, the five kinds of rajas, the attribute of sattva, and then dwelt in Bráhman. Meteors began to shoot, etc. Indra poured showers of rain Himavat and Meru, each yojanas in height and breadth, were in close contact with each other. Journeying towards the north, Śuka clashed against them, and they were immediately broken in two. He was aed by G R Y Rā and Vidyādharas. He saw from a high region the celestial stream Mandākinī running below, with many Aps. Beholding Śuka, who was bodyless, those unclad aërial beings felt no shame. Vyāsa followed behind him on the same aërial path, by means of high Yoga. Śuka, above the region of the wind, identified himself with Bráhman. Ṛ. represented to Vyāsa the achievements of his son. He indulged in lamentations Śuka, who had entered the universe, had become the soul of everything, and had acquired omnipresence, answered by uttering bho in the form of an echo, and the entire universe echoed the answer of Śuka from that time mountain caves and mountain sides still echo sounds uttered there. Having cast off all the attributes of sound, etc and showing his yoga prowess in the manner of his disappearance, Śuka in this way attained to the highest station. Vyāsa sat n and began to think of his son with grief the Aps. who were sporting on the banks of the celestial stream Mandākinī saw him seated there, and all became agitated with shame. Śiva, with G and great Ṛ came and comforted Vyāsa, who by the favour of Śiva thenceforward always beheld a sha of his son by his side. This Nārada and Vyāsa repeatedly told me in days of yore .
Śukakṛti . Bhīṣma said to Yudhiṣṭhira Vyāsa desired Śuka to study the Mokṣadharma Śuka mastered all the treatises on yoga, as also the science promulgated by Kapila. Then Vyāsa caused him to go to Janaka, the king of Mithilā, and not to the skies nor should he think himself superior to Janaka, though he was only his yājya. Crossing the Varṣas of Meru and Hari and Himavat, Śuka came to Bhāratavarṣa. Having seen many countries inhabited by Cīnas and Hūṇas, he reached Āryāvarta, and at last the country of the Videhas, protected by Janaka, and then Mithilā. He had not been fatigued on the way. He obtained permission to enter the city, but was at first roughly forbidden to enter the palace. At last he was admitted into the first chamber thence he was led into the second chamber by the minister, and thence into a garden that was like a second Caitraratha, with damsels equal to the Aps who entertained Śuka and gave him to eat he, however, went unaffected through his rites, and in the first part of the night he devoted himself to yoga . The next morning he was received by Janaka, and was instructed by him about mokṣa and the duties of a brahman ordinarily the purified understanding necessary for attaining mokṣa cannot be obtained without passing through all four stages of religious life but he who in the course of many births has obtained a pure mind, may attain to mokṣa even in the very first stage, and then there is no need for the three other stages, quoting a saying of king Yayāti through the favour of thy father have acquired to omniscience thy knowledge is much greater than what you think it to be .
Śukakṛtya . Bhīṣma said to Yudhiṣṭhira Having heard the words of Janaka, having entered Soul by soul and having seen Self by his self, Śuka without putting further questions to Janaka, proceeded northwards to Śaiśira . At that time Nārada proceeded to Himavat . Then Śuka came to the asylum of Vyāsa. One day the disciples asked Vyāsa to let no sixth disciple be skilled in the Veda. Vyāsa answered that they ought to multiply, and the Veda to be spread, and taught them the qualifications of persons that can be accepted as disciples, and the rules in respect of the study of the Veda . The disciples of Vyāsa took leave of him and descended from the mountain to the earth for the purpose of subdividing the Vedas there they performed the agniṣṭoma, etc at the sacrifices of Brahmans, Kṣattriyas, and Vaiśyas, and taught the Veda. Vyāsa remained with Śuka, passing his days in anxious thoughtfulness. Nārada came and asked him why Vedic sounds were silent now, so that the mountain now resembled a hamlet of Niṣādas, and Ṛ and G. did no longer shine as before and exhorted Vyāsa to recite the Veda and thereby dispel the fears arising from Rā. Vyāsa and Śuka then set themselves to recite the Veda. One day a violent wind arose which Vyāsa declared to be an omen that the recitation of the Veda should be suspended and he explained the Devayāna and the Pitṛyāna, and the Winds, especially Pravaha, Āvaha, Udvaha, Saṃvaha, Vivaha, Parivaha, Parāvaha this wind is the breath of Viṣṇus nostrils. Having said this Vyāsa plunged into the celestial Ganges.
Śuka Nārada saṃvāda . Bhīṣma said to Yudhiṣṭhira Nārada then came to Śuka for the object of asking Śuka the meaning of certain portions of the Veda. Nārada related what Sanatkumāra had said in days of yore to certain Ṛṣis about avoiding attachment, etc in order to attain to final emancipation with the aid of such instructions the deities succeeded in leaving the earth and became the denizens of heaven.
Śukapraśnābhigamana .
Śūkara, pl a people .
Śukasya āśrama, a tīrtha .
Śukī .
Śukla1, one or two Pāṇḍava warriors .
Śukla2 = Śiva .
Śukladhvajapatākin = Śīva .
Śukotpatti . Questioned by Yudhiṣṭhira about Śuka, whose mind became bent on Bráhman when he was a mere boy, Bhīṣma answered The Ṛ. did not make merit depend upon age, etc but upon the study of the Vedas and upon tapas the merit of, horse sacrifices or vājapeyas cannot come up to even of the merit that arises from yoga. Once on the summit of Meru, Mahādeva sported with his followers and Pārvatī, while Vyāsa, devoted to yoga and dhāraṇā, practised austerities for years for the sake of obtaining a son, subsisting on air alone, aing Mahādeva. Thither went Ṛ B. ṛ Lp S Ā R Sūrya, Candramas, Indra, M the Oceans, the Rivers, A G Nārada, Parvata, Viśvāvasu, Si and Aps. This has been told to me by Mārkaṇḍeya. Śiva granted him that he would have a son like to Fire, Wind, Earth, Water, and Space, and devoted to Bráhman . Vyāsa was one day employed in rubbing his sticks to make a fire, when he beheld the Aps. Ghṛtācī, and fell in love with her. When she approached, transformed into a she parrot, he dropped his seed, which became a son, who, from this circumstance, came to be called by the name of Śuka. Gaṅgā came and bathed him in her waters G. sung, and Aps. danced, etc. Viśvāvasu, Tumburu, Nā Hāhā, and Hūhū eulogized the birth of Śuka there came Lp. with Śakra, . ṛ and B. ṛ. Māruta showered celestial flowers Śiva, together with Pārvatī, invested Śuka with the sacred thread Śakra gave him a celestial kamaṇḍalu and celestial robes, etc. As soon as Śuka was born, the Vedas, including the mysteries and abstracts, came to dwell in him, just as they dwelt in his father. Śuka selected Bṛhaspati for his pre ceptor, remembering the universal practice. Having studied the Vedas, the tradition, and the state policy, Śuka returned home, after paying his pre ceptor the tuition fee. Ating the vow of a brahmacārin he practised the hardest penances, even in his childhood. Taking no pleasure in the three modes of life, he only kept in view the law of emancipation .
Śukra1, the upādhyāya of the Asuras and the planet Venus . f, . b, .UpamanyuĀnuśāsanik.Bhārgavaḥ, Taṇḍi communicated the, names of Śiva to Ś and Ś. to GautamaBṛhaspatīSuvarṇotpattithe fifth of the seven sons of Bhṛgu, ŚapathavidhiĀnuśāsanik.Śsya ca Baleś caiva saṃvādaṃBhṛgukulodvahaḥ, .the planetAśramavās.Asureṣu, Vidura excelled Cukra in intelligencePage2 a son of KaviCukrenośanasāŚukraḥUśanasaṃUśanasaḥmaharṣiḥBhṛguśreṣṭhaḥUśanasaḥUśanasaḥUśanasāa śloka recited by him in order to induce the Asuras to aban Jambha, is quotedŚukrasyaUśanāḥ Kāvyaḥ, on Meruhad performed austerities at Kapālamocanaamong the ṛṣis who surrounded Bhīṣma as he lay on his arrow bedwent to heavenUśanāḥ second son of KaviBhārgavaḥsenāpatir abhūt...Kāvyo Daityapater ivaŚukraḥmuneḥKāvyaṃKāvyātŚukreṇaKāvyaḥKāvyasyaKāvyasyaŚukreṇa...Kāvyenaso duhitā DevayānīUśanā veda yac chāstraṃBṛhaspaty Uśanoktaiś ca nayaiḥBṛhaspaty Uśanoktaiś ca mantraiḥUśanā iva cāparaḥ vyūhya cauśanasaṃ vyūhaṃ, sc. Rāvaṇabuddhyā tulyo hy Uśanasā, sc. Droṇabhavān Uśanasā tulyaḥ, sc. BhīṣmaKāvyaḥkavīnām Uśanā kaviḥ, sc. asmi, says KṛṣṇaDaityānām ivośanaḥBṛhaspaty Uśanastulyo buddhyā, sc. Droṇavyūhaṃ...Bṛhaspaty Uśano mataṃnaye Bṛhaspaty Uśanoḥ sadā samaṃ, sc. Droṇabuddhyā cośanasā samaṃ, sc. Aśvatthāmana śloka sung by him is quotedBṛhaspaty Uśanasor...upadeśaḥUśanā veda yac chāstraṃmaharṣiṇā, two ślokas sung by him are quoteda śloka of his is quotedbuddhyā tvam i.e. the mouse Palita Uśanāḥ sākṣāttwo gāthās of his are quotedtwo gāthas sung by him to Prahlāda are quotedDaiteyān Uśanāḥ prāha saṃśayacchedanaṃ purāwas about to instruct Vṛtra about Viṣṇumunināmahāmuniḥ, worshipped Śivadevarṣiḥ...Kāvyaḥmahā muniḥgataḥ ŚukratvaṃUśanā Bṛhaspatiś caiva yapattau bhaviṣyataḥ tadā pravakṣyataḥ śāstraṃamong the ṛṣis who sur rounded Bhīṣma as he lay on his arrow bedUśanā veda yac chāstraṃfourth son of KaviBhārgavaḥ, C. Mārutośanasa, B. Mārutauśanasesaḥ, sc. lokamUśanā veda yac chāstraṃ
Śukra2, a month .
Śukra3 = Agni, .
Śukra4 = Sūrya, .
Śukra5 = Śiva, .
Śukratanayā = Devayānī, .
Śuktimat, a mountain .
Śuktimatī, a river .
Śuktimatī, a city .
Śuktisāhvaya, adj. .
Śūlabhṛt1 = Śiva, q.v.
Śūlabhṛt2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śūladhṛk, Śūlahasta, Śūlāṅka, Śūlapāṇi = Śiva, q.v.
Śūlavarāyudha = Viṣṇu, .
Śūlin1 = Śiva, q.v. Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Śūna, an ancient king .
Śunaḥśepha, son of Ṛcīka .
Śunaḥsakha, the name of Indra, disguised as a mendicant. b, . b, .
Śunaka1, a ṛṣi . b, .
Śunaka2, one or more princes .
Śuṇḍika, pl a people .
Śūnya = Viṣṇu .
Śūnyapāla, a ṛṣi .
Śūra1, an ancient king .
Śūra2, a Yādava, father of Vasudeva and Kuntī . e, . b, .
Śūra3, son of Īlina .
Śūra4 = Skanda, .
Śūra5, a Sauvīra, one of the standard bearers of Jayadratha .
Śūra6, a prince .
Śūra7 = Viṣṇu .
Śūra8, pl. .
Śūrajaneśvara = Viṣṇu .
Śūraputra = Vasudeva, .
Śūrasena1, pl a people p, ʹ, p, . b, . Śūrasenarāj.
Śūrasena2, a Kuru warrior .
Śūrasena3, a Pāñcāla warrior .
Śūrasena4 = Viṣṇu .
Śūrasenarāj = Sunāman, .
Śūrasenī .
Śūrasūnu = Vasudeva, .
Śūrasuta = Vasudeva, .
Śūrātmaja = Vasudeva, .
Śūrpaṇakhā, name of a female Rākṣasa .
Śūrpāraka, name of a place . b, . w, .
Śvaitya1 = Sṛñjaya, .
Śvaitya2, .
Śvāsā .
Śvasana = Vāyu, .
Śvāvillomāpaha, a tīrtha . next.
Śvāvillomāpanayana = Śvāvillomāpaha, .
Śveta1, one or more ancient kings . b, .
Śveta2, a muni .
Śveta3, one of the elephants of the quarters .
Śveta4, a prince .
Śveta5, a mountain . g, . Śvetācala, Śvetaparvata.
Śveta6 = Śvetagraha . Śvetagraha.
Śveta7, a varṣa .
Śveta8, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Śveta9, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Śveta1, an island . b, . c, . b, . Śvetadvīpa.
Śveta1 = Viṣṇu, .
Śveta1, pl. = the inhabitants of Śvetadvīpa . b, .
Śvetā, .
Śvetā = Umā, .
Śvetā, a mātṛ. u, .
Śvetabhadra, a Yakṣa .
Śvetācala, a mountain . b, . Śveta5, Śvetaparvata.
Śvetāśva = Arjuna, q.v.
Śvetadvīpa, an island . b, . c, . b, . Cveta1.
Śvetagraha = Śveta6 .
Śvetahaya = Arjuna, q.v.
Śvetaketu1, a muni, son of Uddālaka . b The muni Ś son of Uddālaka, established the present usage among men that the sin of violating matrimonial chastity is regarded like to that of killing an embryo this Ś. established from anger, as one in the presence of his father, a brahman came and seized his mother by the hand and took her away Uddālaka, however, excused the fact as it was the practice sanctioned by antiquity, .
Śvetaketu2 = Śvetaki, v. .
Śvetaki, an ancient king . Śvetaketu2.
Śvetaparvata, a mountain . . f, . Śveta5, Śvetācala.
Śvetapiṅgala = Śiva .
Śvetapiṅgalanetra = Śiva .
Śvetasiddhi, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Śvetavāha, Śvetavāhana = Arjuna, q.v.
Śvetavaktra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Śvetopākhyāna .
Śyāma, a mountain in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Śyāmā = Draupadī, .
Śyāmāyā āśrama, a tīrtha. m, .
Śyāmāyana, son of viśvāmitra. b, .
Śyena, a ṛṣi .
Śyena, pl. .
Śyenacitra, an ancient king .
Śyenajit1, son of Dala .
Śyenajit2, a prince .
. b Bhīṣma said Once a pigeon, pursued by a hawk, dropped n from the skies and sought the protection of the Kāśi king R. ṛ. Vṛṣadarbha, etc. . The three worlds together with Indra came to behold the king he was bathed in a shower of nectar, etc. G and Aps. began to sing and dance around him, just, as they around Brahmán he then ascended a celestial chariot and proceeded to the eternal heaven. Blessing upon the reader.
Śyenakapotīya . Indra in the shape of a hawk and Agni in that of a pigeon in fear of the hawk came to test king Uśīnaras merit . Uśīnara in vain offered the hawk another beast, and thereafter his king, in order that he might spare the pigeon at last the hawk agreed upon receiving the pigeons weight of Uśīnaras flesh Uśīnara cut portion after portion of his flesh and placed it in the balance, and as it did not out weigh the pigeon he mounted the scale himself, utterly devoid of flesh. Then Indra said As long as man shall speak of thee, so long...thou shalt inhabit the holy regions. Saying this Indra ascended to heaven, and so did king Uśīnara in a radiant shape, after having filled heaven and earth with his merits .
Śyenī .
Daśabāhu = Śiva .
Daśabhuja = Śiva, .
Daśāśva, a king of Māhiṣmatī. b, .
Daśāśvamedha, a tīrtha .
Daśāśvamedhika, a tīrtha .
Daśaśatākṣa, Daśaśatanayana, Daśacatekṣaṇa = Indra, q.v.
Daśagrīva1, a Daitya .
Daśagrīva2 = Rāvaṇa, q.v.
Daśajyotis, son of Subhrāj .
Daśakandhara = Rāvaṇa, q.v.
Daśalakṣaṇasaṃyukta = Śiva .
Daśamālika, pl a people .
Daśānana = Rāvaṇa, q.v.
Daśāpārśva, pl a people .
Daśaratha, king of Ayodhyā and father of Rāma. b, . e, .
Dāśaratha, adj. .
Daśarathātmaja = Rāma, q.v.
Dāśarathi1 = Rāma, q.v.
Dāśarathi2, dual = Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, .
Daśārdhahavirātmaka = Kṛṣṇa, .
Daśārha, pl a people . Dāśārha, pl.
Daśārha = Viṣṇu .
Dāśārha1 = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Dāśārha2 = Sātyaki, q.v.
Dāśārha, pl a people . c, . Daśārha, pl.
Dāśārha, adj. .
Daśārhabhartṛ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Daśārhādhipati = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dāśārhakulavardhana = Kṛṣṇa
Dāśārhanandana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Daśārhanātha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dāśārhaputraja = Dhṛṣṭaketu, .
Daśārhasiṃha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dāśārhavīra = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dāśārhī = Vijayā, wife of Bhumanyu, .
Dāśārhī = Sudevā, wife of Vikuṇṭhana, .
Dāśārhī = Śubhāṅgī, wife of Kuru, .
Daśārṇa, pl a people .
Daśārṇa = Hiraṇyavarman, .
Dāśārṇa1 = Hiraṇyavarman, .
Dāśārṇa2 = the king of the Daśārṇas at the time of the great battle .
Daśārṇādhipati1 = Sudāman, .
Daśārṇādhipati2 = Hiraṇyavarman, .
Daśārṇādhipati3, the king of the Daśārṇas at the time of the great battle .
Dāśārṇaka, adj. .
Daśārṇanṛpa = Hiraṇyavarman, .
Daśārṇapati = Hiraṇyavarman, .
Daśārṇarāja = Hiraṇyavarman, .
Dāśārṇarāja = Hiraṇyavarman, .
Dāśārṇeśa, the king of the Daśārṇas at the time of the great battle .
Dāśārṇika, adj. . Dāśārṇaka.
Daśāsya = Rāvaṇa, q.v.
Daśāvara, an Asura .
Daśeraka, pl a people . next.
Dāśeraka, pl a people . prec.
Dāśeyī = Satyavatī, .
Daśīvidarbha, pl a people .
Dadhīca, an ancient ṛṣi . gg, . Dadhīci.
Dadhīci = Dadhīca. b, . b, . Dadhīca.
Dadhimukha1, a serpent .
Dadhimukha2, a monkey .
Dadhivāhanapautra. b, .
Dagdharatha = Citraratha1, .
Dahadahā, a mātṛ. u, .
Dahana1, one of the eleven Rudras .
Dahana2 = Agni, q.v.
Dahana3, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Dahati, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Dāho jatugṛhasya .
Daiteya, pl a class of the enemies of the gods . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . Asura, pl. Daitya, pl. Dānava, pl. Ditija, pl.
Daiteya, sg. . Names of single Daiteyas Aśvapati, . Bāṇa, . Śibi, . Hiraṇyakaśipu, . Ilvala, . Maya, . Prahlāda, . Tāraka, . Vegavat, . Vipracitti, . Virocana, . Virūpākṣa, . Asura, sg. Daitya, sg. Dānava, sg.
Daiteya, adj. .
Daiteyāpasada = Śālva5, .
Daiteyī = Pulomā, .
Daitya, pl a class of the enemies of the gods . b, . d, . b, . b, . d, . e, . b, . d, . d, . c, . b, . u, . gg, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . k, . l, . b, . d, . b, . b, . Asura, pl. Daitya, pl. Dānava, pl. Ditija, pl.
Daitya, sg. . d, . Names of single Daityas Bali, . Śambara, . Dhundhu, . Ilvala, . Maya, . Namuci, . Naraka, . Prahlāda, . Rāhu, . Tāraka, . Vātāpi, . Vṛṣaparvan, . Vṛtra, . Asura, Daiteya, Dānava.
Daitya, adj. . b, .
Daitya, dual = Sunda and Upasunda, .
Daityadvīpa, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Daityahan = Śiva .
Daityakanyā = Śarmiṣṭhā, .
Daityanāśana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Daityanibarhaṇa = Indra, .
Daityapa = Bali, .
Daityapati1 = Prahlāda, .
Daityapati2 = Vṛtra, .
Daityasattama1 = Namuci, .
Daityasattama2 = Tāraka, .
Daityasenā, daughter of Prajāpati and sister of Devasenā .
Daityeśvara = Bali, .
Daityendra1 = Bali, .
Daityendra2 = Hiraṇyakaśipu, .
Daityendra3 = Ilvala, .
Daityendra4 = Naraka, .
Daityendra5 = Nikumbha, .
Daityendra6 = Prahlāda, .
Daityendra7 = Tāraka, .
Daityendra8 = Virocana, .
Daityendra9 = Vṛtra, .
Daityendra1, dual = Sunda and Upasunda, .
Daivakīnandana = Viṣṇu, v. Devakīnandana.
Daivarāti = Janaka, .
Daivayāneya = Yadu, .
Dakṣa1, a Prajāpati . Prācetas had sons, from them sprang the muni Dakṣa Prācetasa, and from him the creatures, . Dakṣa had from his wife Vīriṇī, sons, whom Nārada taught the Sāṅkhya as a means of salvation . Then Dakṣa made his daughters his putrikāḥ, and bestowed of them to Dharma, etc . i, . u, . c Dakṣa begat sixty daughters, who were all taken as wives by Brahmarṣis from them sprung all creatures P. gaṇāḥ, G Aps diverse kinds of Rā birds and animals and fishes, etc and vegetables, and all beings that are oviparous or viviparous or born of filth, . b, . b, . b, . b, . n, . b, caused a third eye to appear on the forehead of Śiva
Dakṣa2, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Dakṣa3 = Skanda, .
Dakṣa4 = Śiva .
Dakṣa5, a Viśvadeva .
Dakṣa6 = Viṣṇu .
Dakṣa7, a king .
Dakṣaduhitṛ = Svāhā, .
Dakṣakanyā Kadrū, .
Dakṣakratuhara, .
Dakṣaprokta Śivasahasranāmastotra . b Dakṣa praised Śiva by enumerating his names, and adding some further praises. Śiva became gratified and granted Dakṣa some further boons then Śiva disappeared. Blessing to the reader.
Dakṣayāgāpahārin = Śiva .
Dakṣayajñanibarhaṇa = Śiva, .
Dakṣayajñavināśa = Śiva, .
. b Vaiśampāyana said In days of yore Dakṣa made arrangements for performing a sacrifice on the top of Himavat in that sacred region inhabited by Ṛ. and Si G. and Aps where the Gaṅgā issues out of the mountains. The gods, etc came there. Ṛ. Dadhīca in wrath and grief said that this was no sacrifice, since Rudra was not aed in it, etc. he, the great yogin, saw into the future he beheld Śiva seated with Nārada and Umā. Dakṣa said he knew the eleven Rudras with lances and matted locks, but he did not know who this Maheśvara was. Dakṣa said that he would perform the sacrifice unto Viṣṇu. Umā felt grief. Śiva said that it is to him as the Lord of Sacrifices that the chanters utter their praises in sacrifices, etc. . Then he created from his mouth a terrible being, and Umā herself, assuming the terrible form of Mahākālī, proceeded in the company of that being, that was the living embodiment of Śivas wrath and resembled Śiva himself, and came to be called Vīrabhadra. He then created from the pores of his body a large number of spirit chiefs named Raumyas. These Rudras attacked the sacrifice and began to set fire to everything, and tore off the head of the sacrifice. . and Brahmán and Dakṣa, informed by Vīrabhadra, hymned Śiva, who, asked by Dakṣa, granted to him the boon that his sacrificial articles should be of use to him. Then Dakṣa knelt n and uttered his names .
Dakṣayajñavināśana = Śiva, .
Dākṣāyaṇī = Aditi, .
Dākṣāyaṇī = Surabhi, .
Dākṣāyaṇī = Vinatā
Dākṣāyaṇī = the mother of Rājadharman . b, .
Dākṣāyaṇī, dual = Kadrū and Vinatā, .
Dākṣāyaṇī, pl. . b, .
Dākṣāyanya = Āditya, .
Dākṣeyī = Śukī, .
Dakṣiṇa = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Dakṣiṇāpatha, the land in south .
Dakṣināpatha, pl. . Dākṣiṇātya, pl.
Dākṣiṇātya, pl. . next.
Dākṣiṇātya, adj. . prec.
Dākṣinātya, sg. .
Dākṣiṇātyapati = Bhīṣmaka, .
Dakṣiṇāyanamṛtyu, pl. .
Dala, son of king Parikṣit of Ayodhyā, and Suśobhanā the daughter of the frog king .
Dālbhya1 = Baka
Dālbhya2, a tīrtha .
Dālbhya3, a ṛṣi named together with Baka .
Dālbhyaghoṣa, a tīrtha .
Dama1, son of Bhīma, the Vidarbha king .
Dama2, a ṛṣi .
Dama3 = Viṣṇu .
Dāmacandra, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Damaghoṣasuta = Śiśupāla, q.v.
Damaghoṣātmaja = Śiśupāla, q.v.
Dāmagranthi, the name which Nakula assumed in the palace of Virāṭa . Granthika.
Damana1, an ancient king .
Damana2, a Brahmarṣi .
Damana3, son of the Vidarbha king Bhīma .
Damana4, a Kuru warrior .
Damana5 = Śiva .
Damana6 = Viṣṇu .
Damayantī, daughter of the Vidarbha king Bhīma, wife of Nala and mother of Indrasena and Indrasenā . . Bhaimī, Bhīmanandinī, Bhīmaputrikā, Bhīmasutā, Vaidarbhī, Vidarbhādhipatinandinī, Vidarbharājatanayā, Vidarbhatanayā.
Damayantī, .
Damayitṛ = Viṣṇu .
Dambara, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Dambha = Śiva .
Dambhodbhava, an ancient king .
Dambhodbhavopākhyāna . There was a king of yore named Dambhodbhava, who was at the head of the earth his sovereignty extended over the whole world. Every morning he used to ask if there were anyone superior or even equal to himself. Certain brahmans counselled him to curb his pride and as he continued to ask the brahmans the same question day after some high souled brahmans mentioned to him the ascetics Nara and Nārāyaṇa, who have taken their birth in the race of men, and are now practising penances on Gandhamādana. The king marched to the spot with a large army, and found them emaciated with hunger and thirst, etc. He desired a battle with them. The Ṛṣis declined but as he repeatedly summoned them to fight, Nara took up a handful of grass blades, and therewith baffled all their arrows and cut off the eyes and ears and noses of the warriors. The king fell at the feet of the Ṛṣis and said, Let me be blessed. Nara then told him to be obedient to the brahmans and be virtuous. The king returned to his city, and from that time began to practise righteousness.
Daṃśa, an Asura .
Damin, a tīrtha .
Dāmodara = Kṛṣṇa, q.v. Do. = Viṣṇu .
Dāmoṣṇīśa, a muni .
Daṃṣṭrin = Śiva, .
Dānapati = Akrūra, .
Dānava, pl a class of the enemies of the gods . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, . d, . b, . u, . dd, . gg, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . g, . b, . b, . k, . l, . m, . p, . b, . b, . g, . Asura, pl. Daiteya, pl. Daitya, pl. Dānaveya, pl. Danuja, pl. Danuputra, pl.
Dānava, sg. . Names of single Dānavas Bali, . Śālva, . Dīrghajihva, . Durjaya, . Hara, . Hiraṇyakaśipu, . Ilvala, . Kaiṭabha, . Mada, . Mahiṣa, . Maya, . Naraka, . Pīṭha, . Prahlāda, . Puloman, . Rāhu, . Tāraka, . Vipracitti, . Vivindhya, . Vṛtra, .
Dānava, dual Madhu and Kaiṭabha .
Dānava, adj. .
Dānavaśatru = Indra, .
Dānavaghna = Indra, .
Dānavanandana = Puloman, .
Dānavapati = Bali, .
Dānavapuṅgava = Arka, .
Dānavapura = Hiraṇyapura, .
Dānavāri = Indra, .
Dānavarṣabha1 = Dīrghajihva, .
Dānavarṣabha2 = Vipracitti, .
Dānavarṣi, pl. .
Dānavasūdana = Indra, .
Dānaveśvara = Bali, .
Dānavendra1 = Bali, .
Dānavendra2 = Śambara, .
Dānavendra3 = Dhundhu, .
Dānavendra4 = Vṛṣaparvan, .
Dānavendra5 = Vṛtra, .
Dānavendra, dual = Madhu and Kaiṭabha, .
Dānavendrāntakaraṇa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dānaveya, pl. = Dānava, pl .
Dānavī .
Danāyus, daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa .
Daṇḍa1, brother of the Magadha king Daṇḍadhāra .
Daṇḍa2, a follower of Sūrya . b, .
Daṇḍa3, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Daṇḍa4 = Śiva .
Daṇḍa5 = Viṣṇu .
Daṇḍabāhu, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Daṇḍadhāra1, king of the Magadhas . Girivrajeśvara, Māgadha.
Daṇḍadhāra2, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra ʹ, .
Daṇḍadhāra3, various Pāṇḍava warriors .
Daṇḍadhāra4 = Śiva .
Daṇḍagaurī, an Apsaras .
Daṇḍaka1, pl a people . b, .
Daṇḍaka2, a forest . next.
Daṇḍakāraṇya = Daṇḍaka2 . k, . the prec.
Daṇḍaketu, a prince .
Daṇḍākhya, a tīrtha . Daṇḍārtta.
Daṇḍapāṇi1 = Antaka, .
Daṇḍapāṇi2 = Śiva, .
Daṇḍārta, a tīrtha . Daṇḍākhya.
Daṇḍasena, a prince .
Daṇḍimuṇḍa = Śiva .
Daṇḍin1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Daṇḍin2 = Yama, .
Daṇḍin3 = Śiva, .
Dānta1, a son of the Vidarbha king Bhīma .
Dānta2 = Śiva .
Dāntā, an Apsaras. b, .
Dantakrūra .
Dantakūra. d, . c, .
Dantavakra, a king .
Dantavaktra, v. Dantavakra.
Dantin, .
Dantolūkhalikāḥ, a kind of ascetics, .
Dantolūkhalinaḥ, .
Danu, daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa, mother of the Dānavas .
Danuja, pl. = Dānava, pl .
Danuputra, pl. = Dānava, pl .
Darada, pl a people .
Darada, a Bālhīka king . b . rent the earth as soon as he was born, .
Dārada, pl a people = Darada, pl .
Darbhi, an ancient ṛṣi .
Darśaka, pl a people .
Darśapa, pl a class of gods .
Dardura, a mountain .
Dari, a serpent .
Darpa, son of Adharma and Śrī .
Darpada = Viṣṇu .
Darpahan = Viṣṇu .
Darpaṇa = Śiva .
Dāruka, the charioteer of Kṛṣṇa .
Dārukanandana = Dāruki, .
Dārukātmaja = Dāruki, .
Dāruki, the charioteer of Pradyumna . prec.
Dāruṇa1, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Dāruṇa2, pl a people .
Dāruṇa3 = Viṣṇu .
Darva, pl a people . next.
Dārva, pl a people . prec.
Darvī, a country .
Darvīsaṃkramaṇa, a tīrtha .
Dāsamīya, pl a people . next.
Dāsanīya, a people .
Dāsarha, v. Dāś.
Dāseraka, v. Dāś.
Dāseyī, v. Dāś.
Dāsī, a river .
Dasra, one of the Aśvins . b, .
Dasyu, pl .
Dasyumat, a fire .
Datta, a ṛṣi . Dattātreya.
Dattāmitra = Sumitra, .
Dattātman, a Viśvadeva .
Dattātreya, a ṛṣi . b, . b, .
Dauḥśāsana1, patron v. Dauḥśāsani.
Dauḥśāsana2, adj. .
Dauḥśāsani, patron the son of Duḥśāsana Dhārtarāṣṭra .
Daurmukhi, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Dauryodhana, adj. .
Dauryodhani, patron. = Lakṣmaṇa, .
Dauṣmanta, v. Dauṣyanti.
Dauṣmanti, v. Dauṣyanti.
Dauṣyanta, adj. .
Dauṣyanti, patron. = Bharata, .
Dauvālika, pl a people .
Dayāvāsa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Deśarakṣin = Śiva, .
Deha = Śiva .
Dehakartṛ = Sūrya, .
Deva1 = Śiva .
Deva2 = Viṣṇu .
Devabhiṣagvara, dual = Aśvinau, .
Devabhiṣaj, dual = Aśvinau, .
Devabhrāj .
Devabhṛt = Viṣṇu .
Devācārya = Bṛhaspati, .
Devaśarman, a ṛṣi . b, .
Devaśunī = Saramā, .
Deva Dānavapūjita = Śiva .
Devadāruvana, a tīrtha. k, .
Devadatta, the conch shell of Arjuna .
Devadeva1 = Brahmán, .
Devadeva2 = Bṛhaspati, .
Devadeva3 = Śiva, .
Devadeva4 = Dharma, .
Devadeva5 = Indra, .
Devadeva6 = Varuṇa, .
Devadeva7 = Vāyu, .
Devadeva8 = Viṣṇu, .
Devadeva, dual = Brahmán and Śiva, .
Devadeveśa1 = Śiva, .
Devadeveśa2 = Indra, .
Devadeveśa3 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Devadeveśa4 = Viṣṇu, .
Devadeveśvara = Viṣṇu, .
Devādhideva1 = Brahmán, .
Devādhideva2 = Śiva, .
Devādhideva3 = Viṣṇu, .
Devādhipa1, a prince .
Devādhipa2 = Indra, q.v.
Devādhipati = Śiva .
Devadūta1, . Do .
Devadūtaka, .
Devagaṇa, pl. . bis, .
Devagandharva, pl. . Gan dharva, pl.
Devagaṇeśvara1 = Indra, .
Devagaṇeśvara2 = Viṣṇu, .
Devagaṇeśvara3 = Śiva .
Devagiri = Himavat, .
Devagraha, a demon of disease .
Devaguru1 = Bṛhaspati, .
Devaguru2 = Śiva, .
Devahavya, a ṛṣi .
Devahotra, a ṛṣi. c, .
Devahrada, name of various tīrthas . t, .
Devāhvaya, an ancient king .
Devaka1, a Gandharva king .
Devaka2, one or more princes . e, .
Devakanyā, . Apsaras.
Devakī, daughter of Devaka, wife of Vasudeva, and mother of Kṛṣṇa . e, .
Devakīmātṛ, Devakinandana, Devakīnandana1 = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Devakīnandana2 = Viṣṇu .
Devakīputra, Devakīsuta, Devakītanaya = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Devakūṭa, a sacred mountain .
Devala, v. Asita Devala.
Devaloka, .
Devamata, a ṛṣi. b, .
Devamātṛ = Aditi, .
Devamātṛ, pl .
Devamīḍha, a Yādava prince. e, .
Devamitrā, a mātṛ. u, .
Devanadī, .
Devanagara . Devapura.
Devapatha, a tīrtha .
Devapati = Indra, q.v.
Devāpi, son of Pratīpa .
Devaprastha, a city .
Devapura . Devanagara.
Devapurohita = Bṛhaspati, .
Devarāj1 = Indra, q.v.
Devarāj2 = Nahuṣa, q.v.
Devarāja1 = Indra, q.v.
Devarāja2 = Nahuṣa, q.v.
Devarāja3 = Vasiṣṭha, .
Devarāja4, an ancient king .
Devarājābhinandana = Arjuna, .
Devarājan1 = Indra, q.v.
Devarājan2 = Nahuṣa, q.v.
Devāraṇya, pl .
Devarāta1, a prince .
Devarāta2, a muni, son of Viśvāmitra . b, .
Devāribalasūdana = Śiva .
Devarṣi1, pl. . b, . b, . u, . z, . aa, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . f, . b, .
Devarṣi2, sg. Names of single Devarṣis Asita, . Bhūrbhuva, . Bṛhaspati, . Kaśyapa, . Lomaśa, . Nārada, . Parvata, . Tanu, . Uśanas, . Vasiṣṭha, .
Devarṣi3 = Śiva .
Devasārathi = Mātali, .
Devasenā, the wife of Skanda .
Devasenāpati = Skanda, .
Devasenāpriya = Skanda, .
Devasiṃha = Śiva .
Devasthāna, a Brahmarṣi .
Devāsura, adj .
Devāsuragaṇāśraya = Śiva .
Devāsuragaṇādhyakṣa = Śiva, .
Devāsuragaṇāgraṇī = Śiva .
Devāsuraguru1 = Brahmán, .
Devāsuraguru2 = Śiva .
Devāsuramahāmātra = Śiva .
Devāsuramaheśvara = Śiva .
Devāsuranamaskṛta = Śiva .
Devāsuraparāyaṇa = Śiva .
Devāsurapati = Śiva .
Devāsuravaraprada = Śiva .
Devāsuravinirmātṛ = Śiva .
Devāsureśvara = Śiva .
Devasya tīrthaṃ = Brahmasaras, .
Devatātman = Śiva .
Devātideva1 = Brahmán, .
Devātideva2 = Śiva .
Devātithi, a prince .
Devavana, name of a sacred place .
Devavara1 = Sūrya, .
Devavara2 = Viṣṇu, .
Devavara3 = Brahmán, .
Devavara4 = Śiva, .
Devavrata = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Devāvṛdha, a prince ʹ, .
Devāvṛdhasūnu = Babhru, .
Devayājin, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Devayāna, subst .
Devayānī, daughter of Uśanas and wife of Yayāti . When Kaca had imparted to the gods the Sañjīvanī they set out with Indra at their head to defeat the Asuras. In a wood like Caitraratha, Indra transformed himself into wind and mixed up the clothes of some bathing maidens. A quarrel about the clothes resulted in .s being thrown into a well by Śarmiṣṭhā, the daughter of Vṛṣaparvan. Yayāti found her and drew her up by her right hand, and then returned to his capital. Devayānī sent Ghūrṇikā to inform Śukra of what had passed . Śukra threatened Vṛṣa parvan that he would leave the Asuras, until Śarmiṣṭhā, together with, maidens, was given to . . Surrounded by Śarmiṣṭhā and, maidens, Devayānī one day again met Yayāti, who at her request received her in marriage from Śukra, and promised that he would never invite Śarmiṣṭhā to share his bed, . Devayānī gave birth to a son. After, years had elapsed, Śarmiṣṭhā attained to puberty and prevailed upon Yayāti to beget a son also with her to Devayānī she said that she had born the child to a ṛṣi whose name she had not dared to ask. The sons of Devayānī were Yadu and Turvasu, those of Śarmiṣṭhā were Druhyu, Anu, and Pūru. One when Devayānī was walking in the wood together with Yayāti, she met the children of Śarmiṣṭhā and asked them Who is your father They then pointed to Yayāti. Devayānī in anger withdrew to Uśanas, followed by Yayāti. Uśanas cursed Yayāti to be overcome by decrepitude, yet with the permission of trans ferring it to someone else, and he added that that son of Yayāti who would give him his own youth should succeed Yayāti on the throne, etc . e, . Auśanasī, Bhārgavī, Śukratanayā.
Devayuga = Kṛtayuga .
Deveśa1 = Brahmán, .
Deveśa2 = Śiva, .
Deveśa3 = Dakṣa, .
Deveśa4 = Indra, .
Deveśa5 = Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu, .
Deveśa6 = Yama, .
Deveśa7, dual = Brahmán and Śiva, .
Deveśaya = Mahāpuruṣa .
Deveśī = Umā, .
Deveśvara1 = Śiva, .
Deveśvara2 = Indra, .
Devendra1 = Indra, q.v.
Devendra2 = Nahuṣa, q.v.
Devendra3 = Śiva .
Devendratanaya = Arjuna, .
Devī, an Apsaras .
Devī = Umā, q.v.
Devī, the wife of Varuṇa .
Devī = Sāvitrī, .
Devikā, wife of Yudhiṣṭhira .
Devikā, a river . c, . i By bathing in Ḍ. and in Sundarīkāhrada, as also in the tīrtha Aśvinī, one acquires great beauty after death, . b, .
Devyās tīrtha, a tīrtha .
Dhāma, pl a class of celestial beings, mostly mentioned together with the Yāmas . u, .
Dhamadhamā, a mātṛ. u, .
Dhāmakeśin = Sūrya, .
Dhāman1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dhāman2 = Viṣṇu .
Dhāmavid = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dhanada1 = Kubera, q.v.
Dhanada2, a follower of Kubera .
Dhanada3, a mountain. b, .
Dhanada4 = Śiva .
Dhanadā, a mātṛ. u, . Dhanadeśvara, Dhanādhigoptṛ, Dhanādhipa, Dhanādhipati = Kubera, q.v.
Dhanādhyakṣa1 = Kubera, q.v.
Dhanādhyakṣa2 = Śiva, .
Dhanayāna .
Dhanānām īśvara = Kubera, q.v.
Dhanañjaya1 = Arjuna, q.v.
Dhanañjaya2, a serpent .
Dhanañjaya3 = Viṣṇu .
Dhanañjaya4, pl a family of brahmans .
Dhanañjayā, name of an army. u, .
Dhanañjayāgraja = Bhīma sena, .
Dhanañjayasuta = Babhruvāhana, .
Dhanapati = Kubera, q.v.
Dhanaprada = Mahāpuruṣa .
Dhaneśa = Kubera, q.v.
Dhaneśvara1 = Kubera, q.v.
Dhaneśvara2 = Viṣṇu
Dhaneśvarākrīḍa .
Dhanin, the messenger of the Kapas. p, .
Dhaniṣṭhā, sg. or pl a nakṣatra = Śraviṣṭhā, BR. .
Dhanurdhara1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Dhanurgraha.
Dhanurdhara2 = Śiva, .
Dhanurdhara3 = Viṣṇu .
Dhanurgraha, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra ʹ, . next.
Dhanurgrāha, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . prec.
Dhanurvaktra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Dhanurveda1 . b The Dh. is both celestial and human, and consists of four branches and ten divisions, . d, . b, . u, . b, . f, . b, . b, . c, .
Dhanurveda2 = Viṣṇu .
Dhanur yantrāṇāṃ = Śiva .
Dhanus = Śiva, .
Dhanuṣākhya, a ṛṣi. c, . next.
Dhanuṣākṣa, a ṛṣi . prec.
Dhanvācārya = Śiva, .
Dhanvantara1 = Śiva, .
Dhanvantara2, v. Dhanvantari.
Dhanvantari1, the celestial physician .
Dhanvantari2 = Sūrya, .
Dhanvantari3 = Śiva .
Dhānvantarya, a sacrifice .
Dhanvin1 = Śiva, q.v.
Dhanvin2 = Viṣṇu .
Dhara1, one of the Vasus . Pṛthu.
Dhara2, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Dhara3 = Śiva .
Dhara4 = Viṣṇu .
Dhara5, v. Tvaṣṭādhara.
Dharā, .
Dhārā, a tīrtha .
Dharādhara1 = Balarāma, .
Dharādhara2 = Viṣṇu .
Dhāraṇa1, a prince .
Dhāraṇa2, a serpent .
Dhāraṇa3 = Śiva, .
Dharaṇī = Skanda, .
Dharaṇīdhara, pl. .
Dharaṇīdhara1 = Śiva, .
Dharaṇīdhara2 = Viṣṇu .
Dharāputra = Aṅgāraka .
Dharma1, the god of justice . b, . b, . u, . b, . b, . b, married ten daughters of Dakṣa, Nārāyaṇa took birth as Dharmas son in a ble form, viz. as Nara and NārāyaṇaNaro Nārāyaṇaś caiva jātau Dhkulodvahaujanma Dhgṛhe caiva Nara NārāyaṇātmakaṃSudarśanop.in the shape of a brahman Dh. put Sudarśana to the testViśvāmitrop.sākṣād Dha ivāparaḥVītahavyop.Ānuśāsanik.Ānuśā sanik.among the seven dharaṇīdharāḥJanakain the shape of a brahman Dh. examined JanakaUttaṅkathe eldest son of Kṛṣṇa Nakulākhyanain the shape of a brahman Dh. put a brahman family to the testAgastyaJamadagniin order to put Jamadagni to test Dh. assumed the form of Krodha at last Krodha was cursed to become a mungooseĀśramavāsap.Yudhi ṣṭhira is identified with Dh.has been born as Vidura through the curse of Māṇḍavya, Putradarśanap.sya jananī, i.e. Kuntī, Dh. = YudhiṣṭhiraVidura and Yudhiṣṭhira had been born from portions of Dh.Mahāprasthānikap.followed the Pāṇḍavas on their mahāprasthāna in the shape of a Svargārohaṇap.after death Vidura and Yudhiṣṭhira entered Dh.
Dharma2 = Sūrya, .
Dharma3 = Skanda, .
Dharma4 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dharma5 = Śiva .
Dharma6 = Viṣṇu .
Dharmada, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Dharmadeva = Śeṣa, .
Dharmadhvaja1 = Sūrya, .
Dharmadhvaja2 = Janaka, .
Dharmādhyakṣa = Viṣṇu .
Dharmagup = Viṣṇu .
Dharmaja1 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Dharmaja2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dharmajā = Satyā, the wife of Śaṃyu, .
Dharmakāmārthamokṣānāṃ kathanīyakathaḥ = Śiva .
Dharmakṛt = Viṣṇu .
Dharmakṣetra = Kurukṣetra, .
Dharmanandana = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Dharmanetra, grandson of the elder Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Dharmaprabhava = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Dharmaprastha, a tīrtha .
Dharmaputra = Yudhiṣṭhira, q.v.
Dharmarāj1 = Dharma or Yama, .
Dharmarāj2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Dharmarāj3 = Rājadharman, .
Dharmarāja1 = Dharma or Yama, v .
Dharmarāja2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Dharmarājan1 = Dharma or Yama, .
Dharmarājan2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Dharmāraṇya, one or more sacred woods . q, .
Dharmasādharaṇa = Śiva .
Dharmasūnu, Dharmasuta, Dharmatanaya = Yudhiṣṭhira, q.v.
Dharmatīrtha, name of two tīrthas .
Dharmātmaja1 = Nārāyaṇa, .
Dharmātmaja2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, q.v.
Dharmātman1 = Skanda, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dharmaviduttama = Viṣṇu .
Dharmavyādha .
Dharmayuga = Kṛtayuga, .
Dharmayūpa = Viṣṇu .
Dharmendra = Yama, .
Dharmeyu .
Dharmin = Viṣṇu .
Dharṣaṇātman = Śiva .
Dhārṣṭhadyumna or Dhārṣṭadyumni .
Dhārtarāṣṭra, pl . Dhṛtarāṣṭraja, pl Dhṛtarāṣṭraputra, pl Dhṛtarāṣṭrasuta, pl Dhṛtarāṣṭrāt māja, pl. Note. A list of the names of the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra is given, and .
Dhārtarāṣṭra, sg. Citra sena, Duryodhana, Vikarṇa, Yuyutsu = Citrasena, = Duryodhana, . = Vikarna, . = Yuyutsu, .
Dhārtarāṣṭra, adj. .
Dhārtarāṣṭrasuta1, pl. .
Dhārtarāṣṭrasuta2, pl. .
Dhātṛ . b, . h, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, made the vajraBrahma Rudras.Dhātur ādyaṃ vidhānaṃĀnuśāsanik.nūnaṃ hi pāpakarmāṇo Dhātrā sṛṣṭāḥ smaheidentified with Śiva paraṃ Dhātā Vidhātā ca, sc. Śiva sṛṣṭvā dvijātīn DhātāUmā Maheśvaras.brāhmaṇā lokasāreṇa sṛṣṭā DhātrāĀnuśāsanik.the fifth of the ĀdityasŚivaidentified with ŚivaGuruśiṣyasaṃv.= mahān ātmāAnugītāp.sakhyañ caitat kṛtaṃ Dhātrā
Dhātṛ = Sūrya, .
Dhātṛ = Śiva .
Dhātṛ = Viṣṇu .
Dhātu uttama = Viṣṇu .
Dhaumra, a ṛṣi .
Dhaumya1, the purohita of the Pāṇḍavas, younger brother of Asita Devala . Some of these quotations may perhaps refer to one of the ṛṣis under the heading Dhaumya2. Āgniveśya.
Dhaumya2, name of one or more ṛṣis . g, . Some of these quotations may also refer to Dhaumya1.
Dhaumya Āyoda, v. Āyoda Dhaumya.
. Arjuna gave his Āgneya weapon to the Gandharva Citraratha and said Let the horses you give us remain with you for some time when occasion comes we will take them from you. Then the Pāṇḍavas took leave of the Gandharva, and left the banks of the Bhāgīrathī. At that time Dhaumya, the younger brother of Devala, was dwelling at the tīrtha named Utkocaka, engaged in ascetic penances. According to the counsel of the Gandharva, the Pāṇḍavas installed Dhaumya in the office of their purohita, and became his yājyas. Then they resolved to go to the svayaṃvara of Pāñcālī .
. Yudhiṣṭhira told Dhaumya that, missing Arjuna, he s not like to live longer in the Kāmyaka wood, and asked him to tell them of some other dwelling place . Dhaumya described to Yudhiṣṭhira the tīrthas, etc of the eastern quarter, then of the south and of Surāṣṭra, then of the west in the country of the Avantis, and then of the north .
Dhaundhumāra upākhyāna .
Dhautamūlaka, a king .
Dhāvamāna = Śiva .
Dhenuka1 .
Dhenuka2, a tīrtha . c, .
Dhenukāśrama = Dhenuka2 .
Dhīmat .
Dhīroṣṇin, a Viśvadeva .
Dhiṣaṇā, name of a female deity . u, .
Dhruva1, one of the eight Vasus .
Dhruva2, son of Nahuṣa .
Dhruva3, an ancient ṛṣi .
Dhruva4, the Polar star . b, .
Dhruva5, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Dhruva6, a Kuru warrior .
Dhruva7, a ṛṣi .
Dhruva8 = Śiva .
Dhruva9 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dhruva1 = Viṣṇu .
Dhruvadvāra, name of a place. b, .
Dhruvaka, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Dhruvaratnā, a māṭr. u, .
Dhṛṣṇu1, son of Manu Vaivasvata .
Dhṛṣṇu2, son of Kavi. b, .
Dhṛṣṭadyumna, son of the Pāñcāla king Drupada and brother of Draupadī ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, . the following synonyms Bharatarṣabha, q.v. . Draupadi, . Droṇahantṛ, . Pāñcāla, Pāñcāladāyāda, Pāñcālakulavar dhana, Pāñcālamukhya, Pāñcālaputra, Pāñ cālarāja, Pāñcālarājan, Pāñcālatanaya, Pāñ cālya, Pāñcālyaputra, q.v. Pārṣata, q.v. Yājñasenasuta, Yājñaseni, q.v.
Dhṛṣṭadyumnapitṛ = Drupada, .
Dhṛṣṭadyumnasuta = Kṣatradharman, .
Dhṛṣṭadyumnasuta, pl. . next.
Dhṛṣṭadyumnatanūja, pl. . the prec. and next.
Dhṛṣṭadyumnātmaja, pl. . the prec.
Dhṛṣṭaketu1, an ancient king .
Dhṛṣṭaketu2, king of the Cedis, son of Śiśupāla . g, . also the following synonyms Caidya, Cedija, Cedipa, Cedipati, Cedipuṅ gava, Cedirāj, Cedirāja, q.v. Śaiśupāli, Śiśupālasuta, q.v. Śiśupālasya...ātmajaḥ, . Śiśupālātmaja, q.v. Daśārhaputraja, .
Dhṛṣṭaratha, a king .
Dhṛtāśis = Viṣṇu .
Dhṛtaketu, error in C. for Dhṛṣṭaketu, q.v.
Dhṛtarāṣṭra1, son of Vyāsa with Ambikā, the wi of Vicitravīrya . b, . also the following synonyms Ājamīḍha, q.v. Ambikāsuta, . Āmbikeya, . Bhārata, Bharataśārdūla, Bharataśreṣṭha, Bharatarṣabha, Bharatasattama, q.v. Kaurava, Kauravaśreṣṭha, Kauravarāja, Kauravendra, Kauravya, q.v. Kuruśārdūla, Kuruśreṣṭha, Kurūdvaha, Kurukulaśreṣṭha, Kurukulodvaha, Kuru mukhya, Kurunandana, Kurupravīra, Kuru puṅgava, Kururāja, Kurusattama, Kuru vaṃśavivardhana, Kuruvīra, Kuruvṛddha, Kuruvṛddhavarya, q.v. Vaicitravīrya, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭra2, a serpent king . d Dh. is the first of all nāgas, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭra3, a Gandharva . b, . Gandharva, Gandharvarāj, Gandharvarāja, Gandharvarājan.
Dhṛtarāṣṭra4, a king, son of the elder Janamejaya .
Dhṛtarāṣṭra5, Vaicitravīryi, an ancient king . o, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭra6, a king. b, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, pl. .
Dhṛtarāṣṭraja1 = Duḥśāsana, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭraja2 = Duryodhana, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭraja3 = Vikarṇa, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭraja4 = Yuyutsu, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭraja, pl . Dhārta rāṣṭra, pl.
Dhṛtarāṣṭrajā = Duḥśalā, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭraputra = Duryo dhana, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭraputra, pl . Dhārta rāṣṭra, pl.
. Enumeration of the children of Dhṛtarāṣṭra according to the succession of their birth . Worthy wives were in time selected for all of them, and Duḥśalā was given to Jayadratha .
Dhṛtarāṣṭrasūnu = Duryo dhana, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭrasūnu, pl .
Dhṛtarāṣṭrasuta1 = Duryo dhana, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭrasuta2 = Yuyutsu, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭrasuta1, pl . Dhārtarāṣṭra, pl.
Dhṛtarāṣṭrasuta2, pl .
Dhṛtarāṣṭrātmaja = Duryo dhana, .
Dhṛtarāṣṭrātmaja, pl . Dhārtarāṣṭra, pl.
. Bhīṣma proposed to marry the two princes to Yādavī, and to the daughter of the Gāndhāra king Subala, and to the daughter of the Madra king. Gāndhārī had obtained from Śiva the boon that she should have sons. She now was brought to the Kurus by her brother Śakuni, and given to Dhṛtarāṣṭra. From love for her future husband she had bandaged her own eyes with cloth .
Dhṛtarāṣṭrī .
Dhṛtasena, a Kuru warrior .
Dhṛtātman = Viṣṇu .
Dhṛtavarman, a Trigarta warrior .
Dhṛtavatī, a river .
Dhṛtāyudha, a Kuru warrior .
Dhṛti1 . u, .
Dhṛti2 = Śiva .
Dhṛti3, a Viśvadeva .
Dhṛtimat1, a fire .
Dhṛtimat2, a varṣa in Kuśadvīpa .
Dhṛtimat3 = Śiva .
Dhṛtimatī, a river .
Dhūmaketana = Śiva .
Dhūmaketu1 = Agni, q.v. .
Dhūmaketu2 = Sūrya, .
Dhūmaketu3 = Śiva .
Dhūmavatī, a tīrtha .
Dhūminī, wife of Ajamīḍha .
Dhūmorṇā, wife of Mārkaṇḍeya. b, .
Dhūmorṇā, wife of Yama .
Dhūmra1, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Dhūmra2 = Śiva, .
Dhūmrā .
Dhūmrākṣa, a Rākṣasa .
Dhūmrākṣī = Durgā, .
Dhundhu1, an Asura, son of Madhu and Kaiṭabha. b, . Asura.
Dhundhu2, an ancient king .
Dhundhumāra = Kuvalāśva . b, . b, .
. Dhaundumāra upākhyāna. The great ṛṣi Uttaṅka, in his hermitage in the wilderness, by severe penances for numberless years obtained that Viṣṇu appeared to him, and having been praised by him, granted him that he should always remain virtuous and devoted to Viṣṇu, and that he should obtain a yoga power and urge Kuvalāśva, who had been furnished with yoga power from Viṣṇu, to kill the Asura Dhundhu . After the death of Ikṣvāku, Śaśāda was king in Ayodhyā. List of Śaśādas descendants Śaśāda Kakutstha Anenas Pṛthu Viśvagaśva Adri Yuvanāśva Śrāva Śrāvastaka Bṛhadaśva Kuva lāśva, sons. Having installed Kuvalāśva on the throne, Bṛhadaśva retired into the forest as an ascetic. Then Uttaṅka asked him first to slay the Daitya chief Dhundhu, who dwelt underground in the sea Ujjālaka, which was full of sand, in the desert, practised austerities with a view to destroy the gods and the three worlds, Brahmán having granted him that he could not be slain by gods, Daityas, Rākṣasas, Yakṣas, and Gandhervas. Every year, when he sleeps covered with sand and begins to breathe, the earth trembles for seven days, and the sand raised by his breath shrouds the sun. He then told him the boon granted by Viṣṇu . They agreed that Kuvalāśva should slay the Daitya, and Bṛhadaśva retired to the forest. Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Mārkaṇḍeya related During the cataclysm, when Viṣṇu, wearing a crown and the Kaustubha, and dressed in yellow silk, stretched over many yojanas, lay sleeping on the hood of Śeṣa, who encircled the earth, and a lotus sprang from his navel, and from that lotus Brahmán, who is the four Vedas with four faces, the Dānavas Madhu and Kaiṭabha began to terrify Brahmán. Viṣṇu awoke, and offered to grant them a boon, and as they wished to grant him a boon, he chose that they should be slain by him, and at their request he promised to slay them on a wholly uncovered spot, and that they should become his sons as only his thighs were uncovered, he there cut off their heads with his discus . Their son was Dhundhu. Description of his penances, and the boon he obtained from Brahmán, etc. . When Kuvalāśva, with his, sons and his troops, and Uttaṅka set out, and aërial voice was heard, the gods showered flowers, etc and the gods, Gandharvas, and great ṛṣis came to behold the encounter. At the request of Uttaṅka, Viṣṇu filled Kuvalāśva with his own energy. He let his sons excavate the sea of sands in seven days, and then they aroused the Dānava, assailing him with arrows, etc. He swallowed the arrows and vomited flames, which consumed all the sons of Kuvalāśva, but were extinguished by a stream of water flowing from the body of Kuvalāśva, who then burnt him with the Brahmāstra, whence he was named Dhundhumāra . The gods and great ṛṣis granted him the boon that he should always be able to give wealth to brahmans, etc. Then the gods and great ṛṣis went away to their abodes. Kuvalāśva had three sons left Dṛḍhāśva, Kapilāśva, and Candrāśva, from whom sprang the Ikṣvāku kings. Blessing upon the reader .
Dhurandhara, pl a people .
Dhūrjaṭi = Śiva, .
Dhūrta1, an ancient king .
Dhūrta2 = Śiva .
Dhūrtaka, a serpent .
Dhūrya = Viṣṇu .
Dhūtapāpā, a river .
Dhvajavatī .
Dhvajin, an ancient king .
Dhvajinyutsavasaṅketa, pl a people . Utsava saṅketa, pl.
Diś, a river .
Diśā . b, .
Diśācakṣu, a Suparṇa, the son of Garuḍa .
diśaḥ, .
Diśaḥ = Skanda, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Diśāṃ gaja = Mahāpuruṣa .
Diśāṃ pati = Śiva, .
Diganta = Śiva, .
Digbhānu = Mahāpuruṣa .
Diggaja, pl. .
Digvāsas = Śiva, .
Digvijaya1 . Do adj. .
the of the minor parvans, . Arjuna, having obtained his bow, etc prevailed upon Yudhiṣṭhira to let him subdue the North. Arjuna set out on the celestial chariot which he had obtained from Agni, and subdued the North, while Bhīmasena subjugated the East, Sahadeva the South, and Nakula the West, and Yudhiṣṭhira stayed within Khāṇḍavaprastha . The campaign of Arjuna is narrated in full . Full description of Bhīmasenas campaign towards the East . Full narration of Sahadevas campaign towards the South . a, v. Sahadeva b, v. Māhiṣmatī . a, v. Saha deva b, v. Agni . v. Sahadeva . Full description of the campaign of Nakula towards the West .
Dikpati = Mahāpuruṣa .
Dīkṣita = Śiva .
Dilīpa1, an ancient king, the father of Bhagīratha . . Ailavila performed sacrifices at his sacrifices the road was made of gold. The gods, headed by Indra, regarded him as Dharma himself, and used to come to him when he fought on the water his two wheels never sank in. Those who saw him attained to heaven, . b, . b, . Ailavila, Khaṭvāṅga.
Dilīpa2, a serpent .
Ḍimbhaka, a follower of Jarāsandha .
Dinakṛt = Sūrya, .
Dīnasādhaka = Śiva .
Diṇḍika, a mouse .
Dīpaka, a Suparṇa, the son of Garuḍa .
Dīpta = Śiva, .
Dīptaśakti = Skanda, .
Dīptaketu, an ancient king .
Dīptakīrti = Skanda, .
Dīptākṣa, pl a people .
Dīptākṣa = Śiva, .
Dīptāṃśu = Sūrya, .
Dīptamūrti = Viṣṇu .
Dīptaroman, a Viśvadeva .
Dīptasūryāgnijaṭila = Śiva .
Dīptavarṇa = Skanda .
Dīpti, a Viśvadeva .
Dīptoda, a tīrtha . Bhṛgos tīrtha.
Dīrgha1, a Māgadha king .
Dīrgha2 = Śiva .
Dīrghabāhu, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Dīrghajihva, an Asura, son of Danu .
Dīrghajihvā, a Rākṣasī .
Dīrghajihvā, a mātṛ. u, .
Dīrghalocana, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . next.
Dīrghanetra = Dīrghalocana .
Dīrghaprajña, a king . Dīrghayajña.
Dīrgharoma, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Dīrghasattra, a tīrtha .
Dīrghatamas, a ṛṣi. Bhīṣma continued The ṛṣi Utathya had a wife named Mamatā his younger brother Bṛhaspati, the purohita of the gods, approached Mamatā, who by Utathya was pregnant with a child, who even while being in his mothers womb had studied the Vedas and the six Aṅgas. The embryo kicked him out with his foot, and the semen fell upon the earth. Bṛhaspati cursed him so he was born blind, and came to be called Dīrghatamas . The wife of Dīrghatamas was a brāhmaṇī, Pradveṣī by name. With her he begat Gautama and other sons and he, who knew the Vedas and Angas, having learnt the Godharma from Saurabheya began to practise it. He therefore was excluded by the ṛṣis from the asylum, and accosted in harsh words by his wife, who said that she would no more support him and his children. Dīrghatamas then established the rule that from that day every woman should have to adhere to one husband for life, whether he were dead or alive, etc. She then caused her sons to tie him on a raft and throw him into the Gangā. Drifting along, he passed through the territories of many kings, until he was taken up by king Bali, who wanted him to raise up offspring. But Balis queen Sudeṣṇā, who saw that he was blind, sent a Śūdra woman in her stead, who was her nurse, with whom the ṛṣi begat eleven sons, Kākṣīvat, etc. As these sons were his own and not Balis, Bali sent Sudeṣṇā to him, and Dīrghatamas, after merely touching her person, told her Thou shalt have five children named Aṅga, Vaṅga, Kaliṅga, Puṇḍra, and Suhma. Their inions have come to be called after their names, . b, . Autathya, Gotama, Utathyaputra.
Dīrghaveṇu, pl a people .
Dīrghayajña, king of Ayodhyā . Dīrghaprajña.
Dīrghāyus, son of Aśyutāyus .
Diti, the daughter of Dakṣa, the wife of Kaśyapa and mother of the Daityas . b, . b, . g, .
Ditija, pl. = Daitya, pl .
Ditija1 = Hiraṇyakaśipu, .
Ditija2 = Vṛtra, .
Ditijāntaka = Skanda, .
Ditinandana1 = Hiraṇyakaśipu, .
Ditinandana2 = Vātāpi, .
Divākara1, a Suparṇa, the son of Garuḍa .
Divākara2 = Sūrya, q.v.
Divaspati = Mahāpuruṣa .
Divaspṛś = Kṛṣṇa, .
Divaspṛś = Viṣṇu .
Divaukasāṃ puṣkariṇī, a tīrtha .
Diviratha1, the son of Bhumanyu .
Diviratha2, the son of Dadhivāhana. b, .
Divodāsa, king of the Kāśis, son of Bhīmasena or Sudeva . b, . Bhaimaseni, Kāśīśa, Saudeva, Sudevatanaya.
Divodāsātmaja = Pratardana, .
Divya = Kṛṣṇa, .
Divyacakṣus = Śiva, .
Divyagovṛṣabhadhvaja = Śiva, .
Divyakarmakṛt, a Viśvadeva .
Divyakaṭa, a city .
Divyasūnu, a Viśvadeva .
Divyātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Draṣṭātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Drauṇaputra, v. Droṇaputra.
Drauṇāyani = Aśvatthāman, .
Drauṇi = Aśvatthāman, .
Draupada = Śikhaṇḍin, .
Draupadeya, pl the five sons of the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī ʹ, ʹ, .
Draupadeya, dual .
Draupadeya1, sg .
Draupadeya2 = Śikhaṇḍin, .
Draupadeya3 = Śrutakarman, .
Draupadeya4 = Śrutakīrti, .
Draupadeya5 = Sutasoma, .
Draupadi = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Draupadī, the wife of the Pāṇḍavas . Madhu sūdanī, Sutasomamātṛ.
Draupadīharaṇaparva .
. While Duryodhana, Duḥśāsana, Karṇa, and Śakuni were longing to harm the Pāṇḍavas, Durvāsas arrived with, disciples, and harassed Duryodhana with his whimsical and insolent behaviour but as Duryodhana was neither angered nor annoyed, he granted him a boon. According to what had been agreed upon between himself and Karṇa and Duḥśāsana, Duryodhana asked Durvāsas to visit the Pāṇḍavas with his disciples, when Draupadī, after having regaled the brahmans, etc with food, would have gone to rest. Durvāsas promised to so . Then Durvāsas one day came to the Pāṇḍavas with, disciples, when the meal was over and Kṛṣṇā was reposing. Kṛṣṇā then praised Kṛṣṇa, who, leaving Rūkmiṇī, who was sleeping by his side, came to her and demanded something to eat. Draupadī became embarrassed, because the sun given vessel only remained full till she had finished her meal, and therefore now was empty. At the request of Kṛṣṇa she, however, fetched the vessel, and Kṛṣṇa found a particle of rice and vegetable sticking at its rim, and swallowing it he said to her May it please the god who is the soul of the universe, and may the partaker of sacrifices be satisfied. Then he ordered Bhīma to invite the munis to dinner. Meanwhile those ascetics, having bathed in the river, observed that their stomachs were full, and as Durvāsas feared that the Pāṇḍavas would destroy them, looking n upon them with angry eyes, because the repast had been uselessly prepared for them, they all ran away, so that Bhīma sought for them in vain. As the Pāṇḍavas were afraid that the munis might return at night and curse them, Kṛṣṇa suddenly appeared and consoled them. Then he repaired to his capital . One day when the Pāṇḍavas had gone a hunting, leaving Draupadī in the hermitage with the permission of the great ṛṣi Tṛṇabindu and of Dhaumya, the king of Sindhu, Jayadratha Vārddhakṣattri, who, with a view of matrimony, was on his way to the king of the Śālveyas, halted in the wood of Kāmyaka, and seeing Draupadī standing at the threshold of the hermitage, he fell in love with her, and sent king Koṭikāsya to inquire who she was . Koṭikāsya introduced himself to Draupadī and showed her the Trigarta king Kṣemaṅkara, and the son of the king of the Kulindas, and the son of Subala of the race of Ikṣvāku he said that Jayadratha was there at the head of, chariots, etc followed by twelve Sauvīra princes as his standard bearers, and his brothers . Draupadī told Koṭikāsya who she was, and that her husbands were out a hunting, and invited them to alight and await the return of the Pāṇḍavas . Koṭikāsya told Jayadratha the words of Draupadī, and exhorted him to take her with him to the Sauvīras. Jayadratha introduced himself to Draupadī, who offered him water for washing his feet, and promised him fifty animals for breakfast and various kinds of deer, etc etc when Yudhiṣṭhira returned. Jayadratha asked her to leave the miserable Pāṇḍavas and become his wife, but was severely rebuked by Draupadī, who threatened him with the Pāṇḍavas. As Jayadratha said, We too belong by birth to the seventeen high clans, and look n upon the Pāṇḍavas, she threatened him with Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, and the Andhakas, Vṛṣṇis, and Kaikeyas, and called upon Dhaumya. Jayadratha seized her by her upper garment Draupadī pushed him so that he fell upon the ground but at last she was obliged to ascend his chariot, while Dhaumya followed amidst Jayadrathas infantry . When the Pāṇḍavas again met, Yudhiṣṭhira knew from the shrill cries of the birds that the forest had been invaded by hostile intruders, and he caused them to give up the chase and drive home on their great chariots drawn by Saindhava horses. A yellow jackal on their left indicated the violence e. Indrasena learned what had happened from the weeping foster sister of Draupadī, and then they pursued and overtook Jayadratha, who was greatly alarmed . Draupadī, asked by Jayadratha, pointed out to him each of the five Pāṇḍavas, and advised him to throw n his arms and seek the protection of Yudhiṣṭhira, at the top of whose flagstaff two tabours called Nanda and Upananda are constantly played. The Pāṇḍavas, leaving the panic stricken infantry alone, rushed upon the charioteers . Bhīma with his iron mace, embossed with gold, rushed towards Jayadratha, who was defended by Koṭikāsya. The Trigarta king, who had killed the four steeds of Yudhiṣṭhira with his mace, was himself killed by Yudhiṣṭhira, who then, together with Indrasena, mounted the chariot of Sahadeva. Nakula killed Kṣemaṅkara and Mahāmukha, and was compelled by the Trigarta king Suratha to mount Bhīmas chariot. Bhīma put Koṭikāsya to flight and slew him. Arjuna killed the twelve Sauvīra heroes, etc. Jayadratha put Draupadī n and fled. Yudhiṣṭhira, seeing Draupadī and Dhaumya walking in front, caused her to be taken up on the chariot of Sahadeva. Arjuna advised Bhīma to refrain from slaying the remnant of the Saindhava host. Bhīma prevailed upon Yudhiṣṭhira to return to the hermitage with the twins and Draupadī and Dhaumya, while he himself would find out and slay Jayadratha. Yudhiṣṭhira entreated him not to slay him, remembering Duḥśalā and Gāndhārī but Draupadī indignantly required that he should be slain, and Bhīma and Arjuna went in search of him. In the hermitage Yudhiṣṭhira found Mārkaṇḍeya and many other brahmans and ascetics, who were greatly bewailing the lot of Draupadī. Meanwhile Arjuna killed the horses of Jayadratha, though they were a full krośa ahead of him. Jayadratha was then overtaken by Bhīma, but Arjuna entreated Bhīma not to kill him .
Draupadīja, pl. = Draupadeya, pl .
. While they were conversing in the evening, filled with sorrow, Kṛṣṇā, who wondered at the hardheartedness of Duryodhana, Karṇa, Śakuni, and Duḥśāsana, who were the only four that did not shed tears at their being exiled, and who lameṇted their present state so different from their former happiness, tried to excite Yudhiṣṭhira to revenge himself . Draupadī related the old story of the conversation between Prahlāda and his grandson Bali Vairocana, in which Prahlāda told Bali that neither might nor forgiveness is invariably meritorious, and then she said therefore consider, O king that time has come for thee to put forth thy might . Yudhiṣṭhira maintained that a wise man should ever forgive his persecutor that wrath has been given to man for the destruction of the world and cited gāthās of the forgiving Kāśyapa Forgiveness is virtue, sacrifice, the Vedas, etc. men of forgiveness obtain regions in the Brahmaloka when one forgives everything, then he becomes bráhman this and the other world belongs to him who forgives, etc. . From the fact that pious persons are often unhappy and vicious persons happy, Draupadī concludes that Dhātṛ and Vidhātṛ have clouded Yudhiṣṭhiras senses, that it is folly to aspire to final emancipation, that the consequences of acts are inevitable, that God makes creatures to work as a wooden l is made to move its limbs by a wire puller, etc and causes them to destroy each other, that God s not behave towards his creatures like a father or mother, but like a vicious person either God is sinful, or Might is the true cause of acts, and then those are to be pitied that have no might . Yudhiṣṭhira censured Kṛṣṇā for her atheism, saying that one should not act virtuously from the desire of reaping fruits, but because it is ordained so by the Veda, the ancient religion revealed by the ṛṣis, and because it is the conduct of the good and wise neither should one bt virtue or religion nor censure God, by whose grace mortal man, by piety, acquires immortality. For though we may not see the results, being mysterious even to the gods, and the illusion of the gods is mysterious to us, yet virtue and vice are not fruitless, as may be seen from the examples of Vyāsa, Vasiṣṭha, Maitreya, Nārada, Lomaśa, Śuka, and other ṛṣis, who by virtue have become superior even to the gods as also from her own and Dhṛṣṭadyumnas birth nor would men have practised virtue, generation after generation, if asceticism, etc were useless, and no one would pursue salvation, but they would live like beasts, and why should ṛṣis, gods, Gandharvas, Rākṣasas, and Asuras, who are above human conditions, cherish virtue He who, trusting the proofs of his own reasoning, rejects other authority or bts religion and virtue, loses this and yonder world, and is lower than even śūdras and robbers . Kṛṣṇā said that she did not slander religion nor disregard God it was affliction that had extorted these words from her. She maintained that besides what a man obtains from Necessity, Fate, Accident, and deeds in a former life, which God distributes, there are also things of which man himself is the cause, working through his own intelligence and exertion. It is by exertion that all creatures live, even Dhātṛ and Vidhātṛ, as well as the crane on the water. Those who believe only in Destiny or Necessity are both the meanest among men. On the other hand, if God were not the giver of good and bad fruits, there would not be any creature that was miserable, and all exertions would be successful. Manu himself declares that a man should act and if he works, even if he be not successful, his debt is cancelled. Having exerted thyself, thou wilt know what the fruit of thy exertions will be. The tiller tills the soil with the plough, and sows the seed thereon he then sits silent, for the clouds are now the cause and if no rain favours him, the tiller is without blame...If, however, no exertion is made, there can be no success...All this, uttered by Bṛhaspati himself, a learned brahman said to my father and my brothers from them heard it . Bhīma tried to prevail upon Yudhiṣṭhira that he should make war with the Dhārta rāṣṭras, aided by the Sṛñjayas and Kaikeyas and Kṛṣṇa, maintaining that a man should practise virtue for the sake of gaining wealth, and acquire wealth for the sake of pleasure, but neither for its own sake that might and energy constitute the virtue of the Kṣatriya, and that deviation from the virtues of ones own order is never laudable that the Asuras, though elder brothers in possession of power and abundance, were all vanquished by the gods through stratagem that as wealth should be spent by one who wishes to increase his wealth, just as seeds are scattered on the ground, thus a person who throws away a little of his virtue like seeds in order to gain a larger measure of virtue is regarded as wise, and that whatever sin a monarch commits in acquiring inion, he cancels it all afterwards by sacrifices and by bestowing villages, etc on brahmans . Yudhiṣṭhira declared that he was unable to violate the pledge, and that it was now too late for Bhīma to use harsh words . Bhīma said that only he whose life is unlimited, or who knows what the period of his life is, has time to wait they ought to strive for the possession of the king before they died if a man, slaying his injurer, goes the very day into hell, that hell becomes heaven to him the pain one feels in having to suppress his wrath is more burning than fire itself...thou art kind like a brahman, how hast thou been born in the Kṣatriya order those who are born in this order are generally of cruel hearts thou hast heard the duties of kings, as promulgated by Manu, cruel and fraught with crookedness and opposed to tranquillity moreover, we will not be able to live unknown, as we are known all over the world, and many kings, who have been expelled by us from their kings, and robbed and exiled by us, will assist Duryodhana and set against us numerous spies in disguise we have now lived in the woods for thirteen months, which may be regarded as so many years, as pūtikas are a substitute for the soma or one may free himself from this sin by offering food to a bull .
Draupadīputra, pl. = Draupadeya, pl .
. Distressed and thinking of revenging himself on Droṇa, not contented with his children and relatives, king Drupada wandered along the Yamunā and the Gangā and came to a hermitage of brahmans, and prevailed upon Yāja to perform a sacrifice for him, assisted by his brother Upayāja, in order to obtain a son who might slay Droṇa. Then Yāja summoned the queen, but she said that she was not fit for accepting the offspring, her mouth being unclean and her person perfumed. Yāja replied Since the sacrifice has been prepared by Yāja and sanctified by Upayājas invocations, it shall produce its effect whether thou comest or waitest. Then arose from the flames a boy with a crown on his head, his body being arrayed in excellent armour, sword in hand and carrying a bow and arrows, sending forth loud roars, and immediately ascending a chariot. A great invisible being in the skies said that he would destroy Droṇa, etc. After this Pāñcālī arose from the centre of the vedī, and a voice, not coming from a visible body, said that she would be the cause of the destruction of many kṣatriyas. At the birth of both children the Pāñcālas shouted with joy. The queen was regarded as their mother. Then the brahmans gave to the boy the name of Dhṛṣṭadyumna, on account of his audacity, etc and to the girl that of Kṛṣṇā, on account of her dark complexion . Droṇa brought Dhṛṣṭadyumna to his own abode, and taught him the use of all weapons, considering that destiny is inevitable .
. After the brahmans and Pāṇḍavas had taken their seats, Draupadī and Satyabhāmā Sātrājitī, the favourite wife of Kṛṣṇa, entered the hermitage. Satyabhāmā asked Draupadī how she made the Pāṇḍavas obedient to her, in order that she herself might by the same means secure the affection of Kṛṣṇa. Draupadī warned her against using drugs, incantations, etc which were used by wicked women, and said that she kept aloof from vanity and served the Pāṇḍavas with devotion, etc. Formerly, in the palace of Yudhiṣṭhira at Indraprastha, food was daily given to, brahmans, snātakas with thirty serving maids assigned to each, yatis he had, well dressed serving maids with bracelets, etc all skilled in singing and dancing, maidservants who day and night used to feed guests, horses, and, elephants. And it was Draupadī who had the supervision of all this she knew the names and features of all the girls, and knew everything about them, and even about the cowherds and shepherds. She alone knew the income and expenditure of the king and what their whole wealth was, bearing hunger and thirst, and being the first to wake up and the last to go to bed . Draupadī said that for women there is no god equal to the husband, as it is from him the wife obtains offspring, articles of enjoyment, fame, and heaven itself hereafter. In order to attract the heart of Kṛṣṇa, Satyabhāmā ought to let him understand that she aed him with all her heart by promptly, when she saw him enter her chamber, offering him a seat and water to wash his feet and even if he ordered a maidservant to anything, she ought to get up and it herself not to blab of whatever he should speak before her feed those that were dear to him, and keep herself aloof from those that were hostile to him not to stay or converse in private even with her sons Pradyumna and Śāmba and shun wicked women . Then Kṛṣṇa bade farewell to the Pāṇḍavas and to Mārkaṇḍeya, etc and called for Satyabhāmā. Satyabhāmā comforted Draupadī, saying that she would soon recover her ancient happiness, and relating of Prativindhya, Śrutasoma, and Śrutakarman, and Śatānīka, and Śrutasena, that they were well and skilled in weapons and, like Abhimanyu, delighted with staying at Dvāravatī, and were loved by Subhadrā, Pradyumna, Kṛṣṇa, with his son Bhānu, etc and her mother in law, and all the Andhakas and Vṛṣṇis, with Rāma, etc. Then Satyabhāmā mounted the chariot of Kṛṣṇa and they set out for his city .
Draupadī Satyabhāmayoḥ saṃvāda .
Draupadīsuta, pl. = Draupadeya, pl .
Draviḍa, pl a people . c, . next.
Drāviḍa, pl a people = Draviḍa, pl . the prec.
Draviṇa, son of the Vasu Dhara .
Draviṇādhipati = Kubera, q.v.
Draviṇaprada = Viṣṇu .
Dravyakarmasamārambha = Śiva .
Droṇa, the preceptor of the Dhārtarāṣṭras and the Pāṇḍavas, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc son of Bharadvāja, husband of Kṛpī, and father of Aśvatthāman . Bhīṣma prevailed upon . to accept the Pāṇḍavas and the Kauravas as his pupils in the Dhanurveda, . Janamejaya said Tell me about the birth of Droṇa and of his son Aśvatthāman. Vaiśampāyana said The ṛṣi Bharadvāja who dwelt at Gaṅgādvāra one day saw the Apsaras Ghṛtācī coming from her bath then his seed came out, but was preserved by him in a vessel from that seed sprang who studied the Vedas and the Vedāṅgas. Bharadvāja had taught Agniveśa the use of the Āgneya weapon, and the muni who had sprung from Fire now taught it to . . was a friend of Drupada . Droṇa remained in the hermitage of his father and practised austerities. With Kṛpī Śāradvatī he had the son Aśvatthāman . . studied the Dhanurveda. About this time Rāma Jāmadagnya desired to distribute his wealth among the brahmans, and Droṇa with his disciples set out for the mountain Mahendra to have his share in the wealth and learn from Rāma the Dhanurveda, the use of celestial weapons, and the nītiśāstra. When he arrived, Rāma had already given his wealth to the brahmans and the earth to Kaśyapa he then asked . to choose either his body or his weapons. Droṇa accepted the weapons and the Dhanurveda, and then repaired to Drupada, . As Drupada rebuked him for calling him his friend, filled with wrath, went to Hāstinapura, where he for some time lived privately in the house of Kṛpa, while Aśvatthāman, being unknown, taught the Pārthas the use of arms. One when . had by means of blades of grass, which were consecrated by mantras, recovered a ball which the princes had lost in a well, and, by means of an arrow, his ring which he had thrown into the well, he was called to Bhīṣma, whom he told that he had applied to Drupada in order to obtain milk for Aśvatthāman, but had been rebuked by him. Bhīṣma asked . to make the princes accomplished in arms, . Bhīṣma presented . with a pretty house, etc and gave the Dhārtarāṣṭras and the Pāṇḍavas to him as his pupils. Arjuna became the foremost of .s pupils, even superior to Aśvatthāman . Also the Vṛṣṇis and the Andhakas and princes from various countries became his pupils. Even Karṇa came to learn the Dhanurveda he supported by Duryodhana, frequently defied Arjuna, . The foremost pupils of Droṇa were Duryodhana, Bhīmasena, Aśvatthāman, Nakula and Sahadeva, Yudhiṣṭhira, and Arjuna . The Dhārtarāṣṭras became very jealous of Bhīma and Arjuna, . One day . caused an artificial bird to be placed on the top of a tree, and first repeatedly asked Yudhiṣṭhira, when he stood aiming at the bird, what he did see. He answered that he saw the tree, his brothers, and the bird. . reproachingly told him to stand apart. Then . repeated the experiment with his other pupils with the same result . At last Arjunas turn came he said first that he saw only the vulture, and then that he saw only its head, and when . gave the order he struck off the head of the bird with his shaft, . Arjuna rescued the life of . by shooting with five arrows an alligator in the Gaṅgā, which had seized the thigh of . . gave Arjuna the weapon Brahmaśiras on condition that he should not use it against a human foe, as it might consume the whole universe, . c, . c, ʹ, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms Ācārya, Ācāryamukhya, q.v. Bhāradvāja, Bharadvājasuta, Bharadvājāt maja, q.v. Bhāratācārya, q.v. Śoṇāśva, . Śonā śvavāha, . Śoṇahaya, . Guru, q.v. Rukmaratha, .
Droṇa2, a śārṅgaka, a son of Mandapāla and Jaritā .
Droṇa3, a mountain. b, .
Droṇābhiṣecana .
. Janamejaya enquired of the state of Dhṛtarāṣṭra on the receipt of intelligence of Bhīṣmas death. Vaiśampāyanas answer Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sañjaya about what the Kauravas did after the fall of Bhīṣma. Sañjaya mentioned the arrow pillow, etc and that the warriors once more went to battle. The Kurus desired to make Karṇa their generalissimo . Karṇa eulogised Bhīṣma, and promised to be their leader, men tioning the prowess of Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. he commanded his charioteer to make his chariot ready . Karṇa waited upon Bhīṣma . Bhīṣma, mentioning Karṇas prowess against the Kāmbojas, etc urged him to fight for the victory of Duryodhana. Then Karṇa saluted Bhīṣma, and, at his return, was worshipped by Duryodhana and the Kauravas . Duryodhana asked Karṇas advice as to who should become the general issimo of the Kuru army. Karṇa proposed Droṇa . Duryodhana requested Droṇa to take the command . Droṇa, mentioning his knowledge of the Veda and the Śaiva weapon, etc and his inability to slay Dhṛṣṭadyumna, accepted the request. Duryodhana and the kings performed the inauguration of Droṇa, at which the army rejoiced. Droṇa arrayed the troops the Sindhu king, etc in the right wing, supported by Śakuni, etc. Kṛpa, etc in the left wing, supported by the Kāmbojas, etc. the Madras, etc in the rear Karṇa at the head of all the bowmen. The array was in the form of a śakaṭa. Yudhiṣṭhira disposed his troops in the form of a krauñca, with Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna at the head. Omens appeared when Droṇa proceeded to battle. The Pāṇḍavas and Sṛñjayas were broken by Droṇa. Dhṛṣṭadyumna Droṇa . Yudhiṣṭhira urged Dhṛṣṭadyumna and Arjuna to check Droṇa. The Kekaya princes, etc achieved diverse feats. Droṇa put the Pāṇḍava troops to rout. Droṇa the Kekaya princes, etc. . At last Droṇa, having slain more than two akṣauhiṇīs, proceeded hence to heaven slain by Dhṛṣṭadyumna. P etc beheld him . Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sañjaya the particulars of Droṇas heroism and slaughter . Dhṛtarāṣṭra swooned away, and was restored to consciousness by the Bharata ladies. Then he enquired of Sañjaya about Yudhiṣṭhira, etc especially Yuyudhāna Sātyaki, and Dhṛṣṭaketu, and Ketumat and the children of Dhṛṣṭadyumna, Kṣatrañjaya, etc who, giving up all sports for twelve years, and observing excellent vows, waited upon Bhīṣma for the sake of weapons and the five Kaikeya brothers and Yuyutsu, and Dhṛṣṭa dyumna . Dhṛtarāṣṭra recited the feats of Kṛṣṇa the killing of Hayarāja, etc that he had vanquished in battle the Aṅgas, etc and that if Kṛṣṇa would summon them, Gada, etc would take up their position in the Pāṇḍava host and regretted that Duryodhana did not know Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna the destruction of the Kurus he attributed to himself or to Destiny . Sañjaya begins his narrative in detail. THE ELEVENTH DAYS BATTLE Duryodhana, having consulted with Karṇa and Duḥśāsana, etc asked Droṇa to seize Yudhiṣṭhira alive. Droṇa became very glad because Duryodhana had not asked him to slay Yudhiṣṭhira. Duryodhana explained that if Yudhiṣṭhira were slain, the other Pāṇḍavas, who were invincible, would avenge him but taken alive, he might be once more van quished at dice, and so all the Pāṇḍavas be obliged once more to go to the woods. Droṇa said that he would seize Yudhi ṣṭhira if not protected by Arjuna Arjuna, therefore, must be with drawn from Yudhiṣṭhira. Duryodhana proclaimed the promise of Droṇa to all his troops, in order to make him stick to his promise . Yudhiṣṭhira learned through his spies that Droṇa had promised to seize him, and addressed his brothers and allies Arjuna consoled him. A fierce battle commenced. Protected by Droṇa and Arjuna, both hosts seemed to stand inactive. The Pāṇḍavas could not withstand Droṇa, who began to consume the division of Dhṛṣṭadyumna . Droṇa caused a river of blood to flow there. Yudhiṣṭhira Droṇa Śakuni Sahadeva Droṇa Dhṛṣṭa dyumna Bhīmasena Viviṃśati Śalya Nakula Dhṛṣṭa ketu Kṛpa Sātyaki Kṛtavarman Senāpati Suśarman Virāṭa Karṇa Drupada Bhagadatta Bhūriśravas Śikhaṇḍin Ghaṭotkaca Alambuṣa Śekitāna Anuvinda Lakṣmaṇa Kṣatradeva Paurava Abhi manyu Paurava was rescued by Kṛtavarman, and then by Jayadratha Abhimanyu Jaya dratha, who was vanquished Śalya Abhimanyu Virāṭa, etc praised Abhimanyu Dhṛtarāṣṭras sons Śalya Abhimanyu Bhīmasena Abhimanyu Śalya Bhīmasena Śalya both fell n Kṛtavarman took Śalya away on his chariot the Pāṇḍavas vanquished the Dhārtarāṣṭras . Karṇas son Vṛṣasena attacked the Pāṇḍava army Nakulas son Śatānīka Vṛṣasena the Draupadeyāḥ the Pāṇḍavas Vṛṣasena Aśvatthāman, etc. especially Bhīma, etc. . The Kuru army was broken. Droṇa Yudhiṣṭhira the Pāñcāla prince Kumāra Droṇa Droṇa Śikhaṇḍin, etc. Droṇa caused Yugandhara to fall n from the seat of his chariot Virāṭa, etc Droṇa Vyāghradatta Droṇa Siṃhasena Droṇa, who slew both Siṃhasena and Vyāghradatta Arjuna, in order to rescue Yudhiṣṭhira, attacked Droṇas division. Just then the sun set. Droṇa and Duryo dhana, etc withdrew their troops, and so did Arjuna. The Pāṇḍavas, etc praised Arjuna .
Droṇaśarmapada, a tīrtha. b, .
Droṇahantṛ = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, q.v.
Droṇaja = Aśvatthāman, .
Droṇanandana = Aśvatthāman, .
Droṇaparvan, the seventh book of Mhbhr . c, .
Droṇaputra = Aśvatthāman, .
Dronasūnu = Aśvatthāman, .
Droṇasuta = Aśvatthāman, .
Droṇatanaya = Aśvatthāman, .
Droṇātmaja = Aśvatthāman, .
Droṇavadha .
. CONTINUATION OF THE NIGHT AFTER THE FOURTEENTH DAY According to the words of Vyāsa, Yudhiṣṭhira refrained from himself seeking to slay Karṇa, but was filled with grief and anger because Karṇa had slain Ghaṭotkaca. Beholding the Kurus held in check by Bhīma, he told Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc to attack Droṇa, who received them Duryodhana, etc came to Droṇas rescue a fierce battle ensued between the two hosts both armies became sorely afflicted with fatigue and blind with sleep. Arjuna granted permission to the warriors to sleep. Ṛ and the soldiers applauded Arjuna the Kurus asked Karṇa and Duryodhana to abstain from the fight all the combatants laid themselves n on the field to sleep the Kaurava troops blessed Arjuna for his act of kindness. When the moon rose, both hosts, rising from sleep, again prepared for battle . Duryodhana taxed Droṇa wrathfully for his kindness to the Pāṇḍavas Droṇa in wrath promised to slay all the Pāñcālas, and described the measure of Arjunas might and prowess . Duryodhana vowed that he, etc that very day would slay Arjuna, dividing the Bharata host into two divisions. Droṇa ridiculed Duryodhana, saying that it was only right that Duryodhana or Śakuni, who were the root of the hostility, should proceed against Arjuna, instead of causing all the unoffending Kṣatriyas to be slain, and that he should accomplish his boasting vow before Dhṛta rāṣṭra, and that he and Karṇa and Duḥśāsana would slay the Pāṇḍavas moreover, he had e all in life that one should The army then was divided into two bodies, and the battle commenced . THE FIFTEENTH DAY When three quarters of that night had worn away, the battle once more commenced. At sunrise both hosts, alighting from their chariots, etc uttered the prayers of the twilight. After the Kuru army had been divided into two bodies, Droṇa, with Duryodhana before him, proceeded against the Somakas, the Pāṇḍavas, and the Pāñcālas. Urged by Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna moved to the left of Droṇa and Karṇa. Bhīma urged Arjuna to put forth all his vigour. Arjuna Droṇa Karṇa, etc. . Droṇa moved away towards the north the Pāṇḍava troops began to tremble the Pāñcālas Droṇa Drupada and Virāṭa the three grandsons of Drupada the Cedis Droṇa, who slew the three grandsons of Drupada, vanquished the Cedis, etc and slew Drupada and Virāṭa. Dhṛṣṭadyumna swore to slay Droṇa that very day Drupada with his division Arjuna Droṇa Duryo dhaṇa, etc. Bhīma urged Dhṛṣṭadyumna, and they both attacked Droṇas division soon the morning sun arose . The warriors aed the Sun, as he rose, and the battle once more commenced neither Karṇa, etc could be seen for dust. Duryodhana, etc engaged in battle with four of the Pāṇḍava warriors Duryodhana his brothers Nakula and Sahadeva Karṇa Bhīma Droṇa Arjuna Nakula was worsted by Duryo dhana Sahadeva slew Duḥśāsanas driver Duḥśāsana was worsted by Sahadeva Bhīma jumped into the chariot of Nakula Droṇa invoked the Aindra, etc weapons G Ṛ Si Aps Y and Rā. applauded Droṇa and Arjuna, saying that this is no human, etc but a high Brāhma encounter both employed the Brāhma weapon the engagement became general . Duḥśāsana Dhṛṣṭadyumna, who vanquished him and proceeded against Droṇa. Kṛtavarman three of his brothers Dhṛṣṭa dyumna Nakula and Sahadeva, who checked them Dhṛṣṭadyumna proceeded towards Droṇa. Dhṛṣṭadyumna Sātyaki Droṇa Duryodhana Duryodhana was worsted by Sātyaki Karṇa rushed to the rescue of Duryodhana Bhīma rushed towards Karṇa. Yudhiṣṭhira urged his warriors to rush to the rescue of Sātyaki, Bhīma, and the twins Arjuna attacked the Kurus, and Droṇa attacked the Pāñcālas . Droṇa caused a great carnage among the Pāñcālas the Pāñcālas and Sṛñjayas Droṇa the Pāṇḍavas feared, thinking that Arjuna would not fight with Droṇa. Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna to aban virtue and let some man tell Droṇa that Aśvatthāman had been slain in battle. Arjuna did not approve of it others approved of it, but Yudhiṣṭhira with great difficulty. Bhīma slew with a mace an elephant named Aśvatthāman belonging to the Mālava chief Indravarman, and exclaimed before Droṇa Aśvatthāman has been slain. Droṇa did not believe Bhīma, but attacked Dhṛṣṭadyumna and slew the Pāñcālas with the Brāhma weapon, and cut off the head of Vasudāna, and slew Matsyas, etc. The Ṛ. Viśvāmitra, etc etc appeared in the welkin and reproved Droṇa for using the Brāhma weapon against persons not acquainted with it, and called upon Droṇa to lay aside his weapons and leave the earth soon. Droṇa asked Yudhiṣṭhira whether the report about Aśvatthā mans death was true Kṛṣṇa urged Yudhiṣṭhra to save his army by an untruth Bhīma urged him to the same Yudhiṣṭhira distinctly said that Aśvatthāman was dead, adding indistinctly the word elephant before this Yudhi ṣṭhiras chariot had stayed at a height of four fingers breadth from the surface of the earth after this untruth his animals touched the earth. Droṇa became quite dejected, also after the words of the Ṛ and beholding Dhṛṣṭadyumna before him, could not fight as before . Dhṛṣṭa dyumna Droṇa the celestial weapons no longer appeared at Droṇas bidding his weapons, that had not been exhausted for four days and one night, now became exhausted on the third part of the fifth day. Droṇa took up another celestial bow which Aṅgiras had given him a fierce encounter took place between Droṇa and Dhṛṣṭadyumna none else had arrows of that kind that Droṇa used in close fight except Kṛpa, etc. Sātyaki rescued Dhṛṣṭadyumna and was applauded by Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, and the Si etc. . Duryodhana, Karṇa, and Kṛpa Dhṛtarāṣṭras sons Sātyaki Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira urged his troops against Droṇa, who again used the Brāhma weapon Bhīma took up Dhṛṣṭadyumna on his own chariot, and urged him to slay Droṇa quickly both Dhṛṣṭadyumna and Droṇa invoked the Brāhma weapon, etc. Dhṛṣṭadyumna began to slay the Vaśātis, etc. Bhīma again reminded Droṇa of Aśvatthāmans death, calling upon Karṇa, Kṛpa, and Duryodhana to exert carefully in battle. Droṇa laid his weapons aside, devoted himself to yoga, and proceeded to heaven in the company of the foremost of Ṛ in a blaze of light, that only Sañjaya, etc saw Dhṛṣṭadyumna cut off Droṇas head though for bidden by Arjuna and blamed by everybody and threw it n amongst the Kurus, who ran away in all directions, except Aśvatthāman. Sañjaya, through the grace of Vyāsa, beheld Droṇas proceeding after he had ascended the sky. The Kurus, the Pāṇḍavas, and the Sṛñjayas all became dejected and ran away Bhīmasena and Dhṛṣṭadyumna embraced each other, Bhīmasena expecting the slaughter of Karṇa and Duryodhana .
Droṇāyani, v. Drauṇāyani.
Droṇi, v. Drauṇi.
Druhyu1, son of Yayāti and Śarmiṣṭhā . b, .
Druhyu2, son of Matināra .
Druma1, an ancient king .
Druma2, a prince .
Druma3, king of the Kimpuruṣas . d, .
Drumada, a ṛṣi .
Drumaputra, king of the Kimpuruṣas . Druma.
Drumasena, a prince .
Drupada, king of the Pāñcālas, son of Pṛṣata, father of Dhṛṣṭadyumna, Śikhaṇḍin, Draupadī, etc . son of Pṛṣata, the friend of Bharadvāja, used every day to come to the hermitage to play and study together with Droṇa. After the death of Pṛṣata, . became king of the northern Pāñcālas. About the same time Bharadvāja also ascended to heaven, . also the following synonyms Dhṛṣṭadyumnapitṛ, q.v. Pāñcāla, Pāñcālanṛpa, Pāñcālapati, Pāñcāla rāja, Pāñcālya, q.v. Pārṣata, Pṛṣatātmaja, q.v. Saumaki, q.v. Yajñasena, .
. Droṇa now one day asked the Dhārta rāṣṭras and Pāṇḍavas for his fee as their instructor, saying Seize ye the Pāñcāla king Drupada in battle and bring him to me. Duryodhana, Karṇa, Yuyutsu, Duḥśāsana, Vikarṇa, Jalasandha, Sulocana, Subāhu, Dīrghalocana, etc smote the Pāñcālas and conquered the capital of Drupada, while Arjuna, etc waited outside the town at a distance of half a krośa, thinking that the others were not able to seize Drupada. Defeated by Drupada, they fell back upon the Pāṇḍavas. Arjuna, bidding Yudhiṣṭhira not to engage in the fight, appointed the sons of Mādrī his cakrarakṣas, while Bhīmasena, mace in hand, ran ahead to slay the elephants, while Arjuna attacked the Pāñcālas and Sṛñjayas and felled Drupada from his elephant. Drupada and Satyajit rushed at Arjuna. Satyajit had his bows repeatedly cut in twain and his horses, etc slain, and desisted from the fight. Drupada also had his bow cut in twain, etc by Arjuna, who then took a scimitar and, leaping from his own chariot upon that of his foe, seized Drupada, while the Pāñcālas ran away. Bhīma, etc began to lay waste his capital, but were prevented by Arjuna. Droṇa prevailed upon Drupada to accept his friendship, and restored half his king to him, viz that part of it that lay on the southern side of the Bhāgīrathī, with the southern Pāñcālas, up to the banks of the Carmaṇvatī river, where Drupada thenceforth resided sorrowfully in Kāmpilya in Mākandī, on the banks of Gaṅgā, while Droṇa retained that half that lay to the north of the Bhāgīrathī, and thenceforth continued to reside in Ahicchatra .
Drupadaduhitṛputra, pl. = Draupadeya, pl .
Drupadakanyā = Draupadī, .
Drupadaputra = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Drupadaputra, pl. ʹ, . Drupadasuta, pl Drupadātmaja, pl.
Drupadaputrī = Draupadī, .
Drupadasuta, pl. .
Drupadātmaja1 = Śikhaṇḍin, .
Drupadātmaja2 = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Drupadātmaja, pl. . Drupada putra, pl.
Drupadātmajā = Draupadī, .
Dṛḍha1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Dṛḍhahasta, Dṛḍhakṣatra, Dṛḍhasandha, Dṛḍhavarman, Dṛḍhāyudha.
Dṛḍha2 = Viṣṇu .
Dṛḍhāśva, son of Kuvalāśva .
Dṛḍhadhanvan, a prince .
Dṛḍhahasta, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Dṛḍha1.
Dṛḍhakṣatra, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Dṛḍha1.
Dṛḍharatha1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Dṛḍhara thāśraya.
Dṛḍharatha2, an ancient king .
Dṛḍharathāśraya, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Dṛḍharatha1.
Dṛḍhasandha, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Dṛḍha1.
Dṛḍhasena, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Dṛḍhasyu, a ṛṣi, son of Agastya and Lopāmudrā .
Dṛḍhavarman, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Dṛḍha1.
Dṛḍhavrata, a ṛṣi . Dṛḍhavya, Dṛḍhāyu3.
Dṛḍhavya, a ṛṣi . Dṛḍhavrata, Dṛḍhāyu2.
Dṛdhāyu, son of Purūravas and Urvaśī .
Dṛḍhāyu, a king .
Dṛḍhāyu, a ṛṣi . Dṛḍhavrata, Dṛḍhavya.
Dṛḍhāyudha, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Dṛḍha1.
Dṛḍheṣudhi, an ancient king .
Dṛḍheyu, a ṛṣi .
Dṛpta1 = Śiva, .
Dṛpta2 = Viṣṇu .
Dṛptātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dṛṣadvat, a prince .
Dṛṣadvatī, a river . b, . m, .
Dṛṣṭipa, pl a class of gods .
Duḥśala, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Duḥśalā, daughter of Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Gāndharī .
. That Gāndhārī also had a daughter was due to the circumstance that Vyāsa, when he divided the lump of flesh, assigned one part in excess of the hundred to become a daughter .
Duḥśāsana, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra ʹ, ʹ, . Bhārata, Bharataśreṣṭha, Bhāratāpasada, Dhṛtarāṣṭraja, Kaurava, Kauravya, Kuruśārdūla.
Duḥsaha1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Duḥsaha2 = Śiva .
Duḥsvapnanāśana = Viṣṇu .
Duliduha, an ancient king .
Dundubhi1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Dundubhi2, an Asura . g, .
Dundubhī, a female Gandharva .
Dundubhisvāna, a region in Krauñcadvīpa .
Durādhana, a son of Dhṛtaṛāṣṭra . next.
Durādhara, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . the prec.
Durādharṣa = Viṣṇu .
Durārihan = Viṣṇu .
Durāsada, a prince .
Duratikrama1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Dirāvāsa = Viṣṇu .
Durdānta = Śiva .
Durdhara1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Durdhara2 = Viṣṇu .
Durdharṣa1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Durdharṣaṇa.
Durdharṣa2 = Śiva .
Durdharṣaṇa, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Durga = Viṣṇu .
Durgā, a goddess, the same as Umā . f Yudhiṣṭhira praises . with the hymn, vv . For the names occurring in the two hymns v. the synonyms enumerated under the heading Umā.
Durgā, name of two rivers .
Durgaśaila, a mountain in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Durgala, pl a people .
Durgama = Viṣṇu .
Durjaya1, an Asura .
Durjaya2, son of Śāradaṇḍāyanī. c, .
Durjaya3, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Kuruvardhana.
Durjaya4, a king .
Durjaya5 = Śiva .
Durjaya6 = Sudurjaya, .
Durjaya7 = Viṣṇu .
Durjayā, name of a place .
Durlabha = Viṣṇu .
Durmada, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Durmarṣaṇa1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Durmarṣaṇa2 = Viṣṇu .
Durmukha1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Kaurava, Kurumukhya.
Durmukha2, a king .
Durmukha3, an Asura .
Durmukha4, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Durmukha5 = Śiva .
Durmukha6, a serpent .
Durnivārana = Śiva, .
Dururduda, error in C. for Dardura, q.v.
Durvāraṇa1 = Śiva, .
Durvāraṇa2 or Durvāri, pl name of a tribe among the Kāmbojas .
Durvāsaḥsaṃvāda .
Durvāsas1, a ṛṣi . b, . c Kṛṣṇa said put up in my house the brahman Durvāsas, who was green and tawny, clad in rags, who had a stick of Bilva, a long beard, who was emaciated, taller than the tallest men he wandered over all the celestial and human worlds, singing this verse at congregations and in public squares Who would cause the brahman . to dwell in his house He becomes enraged with everyone even at the slightest transgression he that would give me shelter should not anger me. As no one took notice of him, invited him. Sometimes he would eat food sufficient for many thousand persons, sometimes very little, and he would not return home he would laugh and weep without any visible reason no one at that time was equal to him in years he burnt all the beds and coverlets and all the well aned damsels, and then went out then he asked for rice milk having previously caused every kind of food and drink to be kept ready, caused hot rice milk to be brought having eaten some, he ordered me to smear my limbs with the remnant, which did then he smeared Rukmiṇī, and causing her to be yoked to a chariot, he, ascending that chariot, set out of my house, striking her with the hook, and proceeded along the high road the Dāśarhas became angry as Rukmiṇī tottered, he struck her then he leapt n from the chariot and fled towards the south on foot, followed by us. Then he became gratified because had subdued my anger, and said As long as gods and men will continue to entertain a liking for food, so long will everyone among them cherish the same liking for thee so long as there will be righteous in the worlds, so long will thy fame last agreeable thou shalt be to all persons whatever articles of thine have been broken or burnt or destroyed, thou shalt see restored or even better thou wilt have no fear of death through such parts of thy body as have been smeared thou ought to have smeared also the soles of thy feet. saw my body endued with great beauty and splenr. He also blessed Rukmiṇī, saying Thou shalt be the foremost of women in fame, etc free from decrepitude or diseases or loss of complexion, possessed of a fragrant or, the foremost of Kṛṣṇas, wives, and thou shalt dwell in the same world as Kṛṣṇa. Having recommended me to be always thus disposed towards the brahmans, he disappeared. and Rukmiṇī took the vow of always satisfying the brahmans. Having entered our house, saw that everything which . had broken or burnt had become renewed. From that day forth have always worshipped the brahmans, . d, . Atreya .
Durvāsas2 = Śiva .
Durvibhāga, pl a people .
Durvigāha, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Durvimocana, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . next.
Durvirocana, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . the prec.
Durviṣa = Śiva .
Durviṣaha1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Durviṣaha2 = Śiva .
Duryodhana1, the eldest son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Gāndhārī, and the enemy of the Pāṇḍavas . b, ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, . the following synonyms Ājamīdha6, q.v. Bhārata, Bharataśardūla, Bharataśreṣṭha, Bhāratāgrya, Bharatarṣabha, Bharata sattama, Bhāratasattama, q.v. Dhārtarāṣṭra, Dhṛtarāṣṭraja, Dhṛtarā ṣṭraputra, Dhṛtarāṣṭrasūnu, Dhṛtarā ṣṭrasuta, Dhṛtarāṣṭrātmaja, q.v. Gāndhāri, . Gāndhārīputra, . Kaurava, Kauravaśreṣṭha, Kauravanan dana, Kauravātmaja, Kauravendra, Kaura veya, Kauravya, q.v. Kuru, Kuruśreṣṭha, Kurūdvaha, Kuru kulaśreṣṭha, Kurukulādhama, Kurumukhya, Kurunandana, Kurupati, Kurupravīra, Kuru puṅgava, Kururāja, Kurusattama, Kurusiṃha, Kurūttama, Kuruvardhana, q.v. Suyodhana, .
Duryodhana2, king of Māhiṣmatī. b, .
Duryodhanapitṛ = Dhṛtarā ṣṭra, .
Duryodhanasuta = Lakṣmaṇa, .
Duryodhanasuta, pl. .
Duryodhanasutā = Sudar śanā, .
Duryodhanāvara = Vikarṇa, .
. Karṇa proposed to Duryodhana that he should celebrate a rājasūya sacrifice like Yudhiṣṭhira. But as the purohita told him that so long as Yudhiṣṭhira and Dhṛtarāṣṭra were living he could not undertake the rājasūya sacrifice, and advised him to cause the tributary kings to pay him tribute in gold, and with that gold to make a plough, and to plough the sacrificial compound with it, and then to perform a Vaiṣṇava sacrifice that nobody had performed before save the ancient Viṣṇu which was equal to the rājasūya, this plan was agreed upon. Duryodhana appointed persons to their respective tasks, and desired all the artisans to construct the plough, etc. . When Vidura had announced to Dhṛtarāṣṭra that the preparations had been made, messengers were dispatched to invite the princes and the brahmans. Duḥśāsana ordered one messenger to invite the Pāṇḍavas, but Yudhiṣṭhira replied that they could not come before the com pletion of the thirteenth year. Bhīma threatened the other Pāṇḍavas said nothing unpleasant. Vidura was charged with the distribution of food to the guests. After the completion of the sacrifice, all the kings having been dismissed, Duryodhana, with his brothers and Karṇa and Śakuni, entered Hāstinapura . Duryodhana was praised by most of the citizens, and his friends compared him to Yayāti, Nahuṣa, Māndhātṛ, and Bharata, who had gone to heaven after celebrating this sacrifice . Karṇa said that when Duryodhana had slain the Pāṇḍavas in battle and completed the rājasūya sacrifice he would once more honour him thus, and promised that until he had slain Arjuna he would not allow his feet to be washed, nor taste meat, and he would observe the Asura vow, and never refuse to give to whoever might solicit him.
Dūṣaṇa, a Rākṣasa .
Dūṣaṇānuja, dual = Vajravega and Pramāthin, .
Dūṣaṇāvaraja = Pramāthin, .
Dūṣaṇāvaraja, dual = Vajravega and Pramāthin, .
Duṣkāla = Śiva .
Duṣkarṇa, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Duṣkṛtihan = Viṣṇu .
Duṣmanta, v. Duṣyanta.
Duṣparājaya, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Duṣpradharṣa, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . next.
Duṣpradharṣaṇa, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . next.
Duṣpraharṣa, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Duṣprakampa = Śiva .
Duṣvanta, v. Duṣyanta.
Duṣyanta1, an ancient king, the husband of Śakuntalā and the father of Bharata . The founder of the Paurava line was who ruled the whole world, even the Mlecchas. Description of his happy rule. . could take up the mountain Mandara and support it in his arms . One day . went a hunting . Having come to a forest, which was situated near the river Mālinī and was the resort of ascetics, Cāraṇas, Gandharvas, Apsarases, monkeys, Vālakhilyas, etc in the hermitage of the Ṛṣi Kaṇva Kāśyapa, saw Kaṇvas ated daughter Śakuntalā, .
Duṣyanta2, son of Ajamīḍha .
Dvādaśa = Śiva .
Dvādaśabhuja, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Dvādaśākṣa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Dvādaśanetrabāhu = Skanda, .
Dvādaśātman = Sūrya, .
Dvaipāyana1 = Vyāsa, q.v.
Dvaipāyana2, a lake . next.
Dvaipāyanahrada = Dvaipāyana2, .
Dvaipāyanasuta = Śuka, .
Dvaipāyanātmaja = Śuka, .
Dvaitavana1, name of a forest .
Dvaitavana2, name of a lake .
Dvaitavanapraveśa . The Pāṇḍavas, with Kṛṣṇa and Dhaumya, on costly chariots yoked with excellent steeds, went into the forest, distributing niṣkas of gold, etc to brahmans versed in Śikṣā, akṣara, and mantras, and followed by twenty attendants with bows, etc while Indrasena, with the princesss clothes and ornaments and the nurses and maidservants, followed in a chariot. The citizens walked round Yudhiṣṭhira, and the brahmans and principal men of Kurujāṅgala of all castes saluted him and blamed the Dhārtarāṣṭras, etc. Arjuna told them that after their exile they would take away the good name of their enemies, and asked them to beseech the ascetics for their good. At last they returned to their respective abodes . After a conference between Yudhiṣṭhira and Arjuna, they resolved upon dwelling for these twelve years at the sacred lake Dvaitavana in the forest of the same name, on the banks of Bhogavatī, surrounded by many brahmans, and saluted by hosts of Cāraṇas and Siddhas, who came to see Yudhi ṣṭhira . While they were dwelling there, Dhaumya performed their iṣṭis and offerings to the Pitṛs, etc. Once the old ṛṣi Mārkaṇḍeya came to them and smiled, recollecting Rāma Dāśarathi, whom he had seen on the top of the Ṛṣyamūka, and comforted Yudhiṣṭhira by reminding him of the aforesaid Rāma, Nābhāga, Bhagīratha, etc and Alarka, the king of the Kāśis and the Karūṣas, the seven ṛṣis, who had followed the ordinance of the Creator and therefore blazed in the firmament so you will regain prosperity. Then he went away in a northerly direction . The Dvaitavana forest becoming filled with brahmans, and always resounding with Vedic recitations, mingling with the twangs of the bows of the Pāṇḍavas, a beautiful union of brahman and kṣatriya customs was produced. Therefore one evening the ṛṣi Baka Dālbhya represented to Yudhiṣṭhira that the kṣatriya should always consult with a brahman, as did the Asura king Bali, the son of Virocana, who went to no other tīrtha than the brahmans, and then had all his wishes gratified, but who met with destruction when he began to act unjustly towards them. Then all those brahmans, Dvaipāyana, Nārada, Jāmadagnya, etc praised Yudhiṣṭhira .
Dvāpara1, name of a yuga . In the . religion decreases by a half Nārāyaṇa is yellow the Veda becomes divided into four parts, etc . b, . b, .
Dvāpara2, a term of dice .
Dvāparayuga, v. Dvāpara1.
Dvārakā, the capital of the Vṛṣṇis . b, . b, . b, . b, . Dvāravatī, Kuśasthalī.
Dvārakādhipati = Āhuka, .
dvārapāla, said of various Yakṣas, . Do pl .
Dvāravatī, the capital of the Vṛṣṇis . b, . d, . Dvārakā, Kuśasthalī.
Dvārikā, v. Dvārakā.
Dveṣa = Śiva .
Dvetavana, v. Dvaitavana.
dvijarṣi sg pl .
Dvimūrdhan, an Asura .
Dvīpicarmanivāsin = Śiva, .
dvīpin, pl. .
Dvirvyūha = Viṣṇu, .
Dvita, a ṛṣi, brother of Ekata and Trita. b, . c, . b, .
Dvivida, a monkey chief .
Dviyodha = Arjuna, .
Dyaus1 . u, .
Dyaus2, a Vasu .
Dyumatsena, king of the Śālvas, husband of Śaibyā, and father of Satyavat .
Dyumatsenasuta = Satyavat, .
Dyūtaparvan . When Vyāsa with his disciples came to take leave, Yudhiṣṭhira asked him about the celestial, atmospherical, and terrestrial portents which, according to the statement of Nārada, had happened at the rājasūya. Vyāsa said that in thirteen years they would be fulfilled by the destruction of all the kṣatriyas, and that Yudhiṣṭhira would that very night see Śiva gazing incessantly towards the direction presided over by the king of the Pitṛs . Then Vyāsa with his disciples proceeded towards Kailāsa. Yudhiṣṭhira resolved to die in order that he might not be the cause of the destruction of the kṣatriyas, but called back from his intention by Phālguna, he took upon him the vow not to speak a harsh word to his brothers or to any of the kings. Then, having gratified the Pitṛs and gods, he entered his own palace, accompanied by his ministers . Duryodhana, accompanied by Śakuni, by and by beheld all the sabhā he mistook a piece of crystal for water and drew off his clothes, mistook a lake for land and fell in, etc and was laughed at by Bhīma, Arjuna, the twins, and the menials of the palace. Filled with wrath and jealousy he became pale, and returned to Hāstinapura, together with Śakuni . Śakuni told him to ask Yudhiṣṭhira, who was very fond of gambling and did not know how to play, to play at dice then he, who was skilled in dice, would win his king and prosperity for Duryodhana . Śakuni told Dhṛtarāṣṭra that Duryo dhana was pale and depressed Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Duryodhana the cause Duryodhana told him that Yudhiṣṭhira supported, snātakas, giving to each of them thirty slave girls that, other brahmans daily ate at his palace the best food off golden plates that the king of Kāmboja sent to him innumerable skins, etc. that the Ocean brought the Vāruṇa nectar to him in a vessel of copper, as the celestial wives to Indra that Vāsudeva, having brought an excellent conch, bathed him with sea water brought in, jars of gold, etc from the eastern, southern, and western oceans that the conches, which were blown when, brahmans were fed, could be heard there almost incessantly, etc. Duryodhana proposed to Dhṛtarāṣṭra to invite Yudhi ṣṭhira to a game at dice with Śakuni, and prevented him from consulting Vidura till he had had a sabhā built. Then he ordered Vidura, who dissuaded him in vain, to invite Yudhiṣṭhira. Vidura in great sorrow went to Bhīṣma . At the request of Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related that Dhṛtarāṣṭra, having ascertained the opinion of Vidura, sought to bring Duryodhana back from his purpose to play at dice but Duryodhana would not give way, relating that the Nīpas, Citrakas, the Kaukuras, the Kāraskaras, and the Lohajaṅghas were like bondsmen in the house of Yudhi ṣṭhira, and that Bhīma, Arjuna, and Draupadī had laughed at his mistake regarding the crystal, etc. . Duryodhana enumerated to Dhṛtarāṣṭra the articles brought as tribute from various peoples to Yudhiṣṭhira. Yājñasenī daily took care that everybody, including the deformed and the dwarfs, had eaten before she herself took her meal. Only two peoples did not pay tribute to Yudhiṣṭhira, the Pāñcālas, in consequence of their relationship by marriage, and the Andhaka Vṛṣṇis, in consequence of their friendship . Duryo dhana continued to enumerate kings, etc who waited upon Yudhiṣṭhira at the rājasūya. The Ocean brought that Vāruṇa conch, which Viśvakarman had constructed with, niṣkas, and which Prajāpati had in a former kalpa presented to Indra with that conch Kṛṣṇa anointed Yudhiṣṭhira. When the conches were blown, those among the kings who were weak fell n, and Dhṛṣṭadyumna, Sātyaki, the Pāṇḍavas, and Keśava laughed then Bībhatsu gave to the principal brahmans bullocks with horns plated with gold, and Yudhiṣṭhira obtained, like Hariścandra, such properity that he surpassed Rantideva, Nābhāga, Yauvanāśva, Manu, Pṛthu Vainya, Bhagīratha, Yayāti, and Nahuṣa . Continuation of the con versation between Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Duryodhana . As Śakuni recommended the match of dice and praised his own dexterity in gambling, and Duryodhana spoke reprovingly of Vidura on account of his fondness for the Pāṇḍavas, etc Dhṛtarāṣṭra reluctantly caused the sabhā to be built, with, columns aned with gold and lapis lazuli, a krośa in length and breadth, and then ordered Vidura to bring Yudhiṣṭhira and his brothers . Vidura arrived at the palace of Yudhiṣṭhira and invited him. Yudhiṣṭhira, having learned that he should have to play with Śakuni, Viviṃśati, Citrasena, Satyavrata, Purumitra, and Jaya, the most desperate and terrible gamblers, always depending upon deceit, was unwilling to come but as he had made the vow never to refuse when challenged, he set out for Hāstinapura the next day with his relatives, Draupadī, brahmans, etc riding on the chariot taken charge of by Bāhlīka, and when he had arrived he saluted Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Karṇa, Kṛpa, Aśvatthāman, Somadatta, Duryodhana, Śalya, Saubala, Duḥśāsana, Jayadratha, etc and Gāndhārī and Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Śakuni exhorted Yudhiṣṭhira to gamble. Yudhi ṣṭhira quoted Asita Devala, but he was obliged to assent Duryodhana said that he himself would supply jewels, etc and that it was for him that Śakuni would play . The play began, the stake being a wreath of pearls, which Śakuni won . Śakuni then won from Yudhiṣṭhira his treasury, slave girls, serving men, elephants, chariots, the Gandharva horses which Citrasena had given to Arjuna, his warriors, and nidhis . Vidura, addressing Dhṛta rāṣtṛa, quoted the words of Kāvya, and reminded him that among the Bhojas they had abaned an unworthy son the Andhakas, Yādavas, and Bhojas had abaned Kaṃsa, and when he had been slain by Kṛṣṇa the whole tribe became glad for a hundred years let Arjuna slay this Suyodhana at thy command he quoted what Kāvya said to the Asuras in order to induce them to aban Jambha, and related how a king from greediness after gold killed some gold vomiting fowls that dwelt in his house, and so destroyed both his present and future wealth . Vidura warned against the gambling, and suggested to Dhṛtarāṣṭra rather to win the Pāṇḍavas than their wealth, and to let Śakuni, the hill king, return whence he came . Duryodhana blamed Vidura for his partiality towards the Pāṇḍavas, and said that he would only follow the advice of his own intellect. Vidura complained of the ingratitude of kings and their fondness of flattery . Yudhiṣṭhira lost his wealth, kine, horses, goats, and sheep, from Parṇāśā to the eastern bank of the Sindhu, his city, country, lands, and the wealth of all dwelling therein, except that of the brahmans, and all those persons themselves except the brahmans, the ear rings and niṣkas and other ornaments of the princes who were present, then Nakula, Sahadeva, Arjuna, Bhīma, himself, and Draupadī now Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Kṛpa, Vidura, etc all gave way to grief, but Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Karṇa, Duḥśāsana, etc were glad . Duryodhana ordered Kṣattṛ to bring hither Draupadī to sweep the chambers and stay with the servant maids Vidura declared that having lost himself, Yudhiṣṭhira could not lawfully stake Draupadī, and said A goat had once swallowed a knife, and when it was pierced by it the hunter placed the head of the animal on the ground, and when drawing the knife out he tore its throat frightfully therefore not swallow the wealth of the Pāṇḍavas . Then Duryodhana ordered the prā tikāmin to bring Draupadī she ordered him to ask Yudhiṣṭhira whether he had lost himself or her first as Yudhiṣṭhira said nothing, Duryodhana ordered that Draupadī should come and put her question in the assembly she sent the sūta back to the assembly saying that she would what aged and virtuous persons would tell her all sat without uttering a word but Yudhiṣṭhira sent a trusted messenger to Draupadī, directing that, although in consequence of her season having come she was attired in one piece of cloth only. she should come before her father in law weeping bitterly. Duryodhana again ordered the prātikāmin to bring her, and as he seemed irresolute, he asked Duḥśāsana to so. As she would flee to the ladies household, Duḥśāsana dragged her in by her hair, while she was praying to Kṛṣṇa and Jiṣṇu, who were Nārāyaṇa and Nara, and blaming Droṇa, Bhīṣma, Vidura, etc for looking silently on this crime. As she was casting a glance upon her enraged lords, Duḥśāsana, dragging her still more forcibly, addressed her, Slave slave and laughed aloud, applauded by Karṇa, Śakuni, and Duryodhana, while all the others were filled with sorrow. Bhīṣma declared himself to be unable to decide the question she had put. As she then asked the others present to decide it, Duḥśāsana spoke many harsh words, and Bhīma, looking at Yudhiṣṭhira, gave way to wrath . Bhīma blamed Yudhiṣṭhira, and ordered Sahadeva to bring fire, as he wanted to burn the hands of Yudhiṣṭhira, but Arjuna appeased him. Vikarṇa repeatedly appealed to those present to decide the question, and as they did not say one word, he declared that as Yudhiṣṭhīra must be regarded as of no authority, because he had shown himself addicted to the vice of gambling, etc he regarded Draupadī as not won. All applauded him, except Karṇa, who maintained that she had been justly won, and as, contrary to the ordinance of the gods that a woman should have only one husband, she had five husbands, there was no impropriety in dragging her to the assembly, and even to uncover her. Karṇa then asked Duḥśāsana to take off the robes of the Pāṇḍavas and the attire of Draupadī. The Pāṇḍavas took off their upper garments, and Duḥśāsana began to drag off the attire of Draupadī. But as she thought of and cried to Hari, Dharma continually covered her anew with excellent clothes. Bhīma swore that he would drink the blood of Duḥśāsana. All blamed Duḥśāsana and Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Vidura exhorted the assembly to answer the question put by Draupadī, and related the dialogue of Prahlāda and Āṅgirasa . v. Prahlāda. The kings answered not a word, and Karṇa told Duḥśāsana to take away the slave woman Kṛṣṇā to the inner apartments . Dragged by Duḥśāsana, Draupadī saluted the assembly, complained of being exposed to the gaze of the crowd, and again asked them to answer her question. Bhīṣma again declared himself unable to decide it, but thought Yudhiṣṭhira ought to decide it . Duryodhana said to Draupadī Let thy husbands decide the question, and, by making Yudhiṣṭhira the just a liar, free thee from slavery. Bhīma said that only his obedience to Yudhiṣṭhira and the admoni tions of Arjuna retained him from killing the wretched sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and Vidura asked him to forbear . Karṇa exhorted Draupadī to choose a new husband among the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and Duryodhana, after having exhorted Yudhiṣṭhira to decide the question, uncovered his left thigh and showed it to Draupadī. Bhīṣma swore that he would break this thigh of his. Vidura warned them, and was of opinion that Yudhiṣṭhira had no right to stake her. Duryodhana said that if Bhīma, Arjuna, and the twins declared that Yudhiṣṭhira was not their master, then Draupadī should be free. Arjuna said that he was certainly their master before the play, but having lost himself, let all the Kauravas judge whose master he could be after that. Just then a jackal began to cry near the agnihotra of Dhṛta rāṣṭra, and other terrible omens were heard. On that account Gāndhārī and Vidura remonstrated with Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who blamed Duryodhana and granted a boon to Kṛṣṇā. She chose that Yudhiṣṭhira should become free from slavery. As she was granted a second boon, she asked that Bhīma and his brothers with their chariots and bows should regain their liberty. She refused to ask a third boon . Karṇa praised Draupadī for having saved her husbands. Bhīma threatened to slay all his foes instantly, but was retained by Arjuna and Yudhiṣṭhira . Dhṛtarāṣṭra sent Yudhiṣṭhira with his brothers and Kṛṣṇā upon their chariots to Indra prastha, having asked him not to remember the harshness of Duryodhana .
Dyutidhara = Viṣṇu .
Dyutimat1, king of the Madras .
Dyutimat2, a mountain in Kuśadvīpa .
Dyutimat3, king of the Śālvas .
Dyutimat4, king of Māhismatī. b, .
Eḍī, a mātṛ. u, .
Eka
Ekacakra, an Asura .
Ekacakrā, a city .
Ekacūḍā, a mātṛ. u, .
Ekaśīrṣan = Śiva .
Ekaśṛṅga, pl a class of Pitṛs .
Ekaśṛṅga = Viṣṇu, .
Ekahaṃsa, a tīrtha, .
Ekajaṭa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Ekākṣa1, an Asura .
Ekākṣa2, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Ekākṣa3 = Śiva, .
Ekalavya, a Niṣāda prince . Among the kings and princes who flocked to Droṇa by thousands to learn the Dhanurveda was E the son of the Niṣāda king Hiraṇyadhanus. Not admitted, because he was a Naiṣādi, he in the forest practised weapons before a clay image of Droṇa and became very skilled in shooting. One day when the sporting of the princes came upon him he shot seven arrows into its mouth, and thus pierced the came back to the Pāṇḍavas, who highly admired the precision of the archer. In order that he might not surpass Arjuna, Droṇa took from E. the thumb of his right hand as his tutorial fee, . c, . Naiṣādi, Niṣāda, Niṣādarāja.
Ekalavyasuta .
Ekānaṃśā = Kuhū, .
Ekāntadarśaṇa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Ekapad1, an Asura .
Ekapad2 = Śiva .
Ekapad3 = Viṣṇu .
Ekapāda, pl a people .
Ekaparvataka, a mountain .
Ekāsana, pl a people .
Ekata, a ṛṣi, brother of Dvita and Trita. b, . c, . b, .
Ekātman = Viṣṇu .
Ekatvacā, a mātṛ. u, .
Ekavaktrā, a mātṛ. u, .
Ekavyūhavibhāga = Viṣṇu, .
Elāpatra, a serpent .
Elapatra = Elāpatra . d, .
Elaputra, v. Elapatra.
Elavila, v. Ailavila.
Eraka, a serpent .
Etāvarṇau = Nara and Nārāyaṇa, .
Gabdhakālī, v. Gandhakālī.
Gabhasti = Śiva .
Gabhastimat = Sūrya, .
Gabhastinemi = Viṣṇu, .
Gabhīra = Viṣṇu .
Gabhīrātman = Viṣṇu .
Gada, a Vṛṣṇi, the younger brother of Kṛṣṇa . b, .
Gadādhara1 = Viṣṇu . Do. = Kubera, .
Gadāgraja1 = Kṛṣṇa, q.v. Do. = Viṣṇu .
Gadāparvan . c, .
Gadapūrvaja = Kṛṣṇa, .
Gadāvasāna, name of a place near Mathurā .
Gadāyuddha .
. Gadāparvan, Gadāyuddha. Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related Duryodhana agreed to fight his foes, one at a time Yudhiṣṭhira granted his request, adding that if he could slay even one of the five Pāṇḍavas he would remain king. Duryodhana rose from the lake and challenged the Pāṇḍavas Yudhiṣṭhira taunted him with his unfair conduct in slaying Abhimanyu . Kṛṣṇa reproved Yudhi ṣṭhira for his rashness in staking everything on the result of such a single combat with Duryodhana Bhīmasena assured Kṛṣṇa that Duryodhana would be no match for him in an encounter with the mace Kṛṣṇa applauded Bhīma, and exhorted him to slay Duryodhana Sātyaki, etc applauded Bhīma Bhīmas boastful address to Yudhiṣṭhira and Duryodhana Duryodhanas dignified reply, applauded by the Pāṇḍavas and Sṛñjayas the elephants began to grunt and the steeds to neigh the weapons of the Pāṇḍavas blazed forth of their own accord . When the battle between Bhīma and Duryodhana was about to commence, Bala Rāma, having heard that that battle between his two disciples was about to begin, came and was worshipped by the Pāṇḍavas, Kṛṣṇa, etc. he said that forty two days had passed since he departed, having set out under the constellation Puṣya and come back under the constellation Śravaṇa he was clad in blue robes and of fair complexion. Then that dreadful encounter took place . Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related how Bala Rāma had determined upon and set out on a pilgrimage to the tīrthas on the Sarasvatī, having let the sacred fire be brought from Dvārakā and the priests, and having given away rich ations to every one who wished for them, accompanied by priests, friends, brahmans, chariots, elephants, steeds, and servants, visiting all the sacred places along her course. In the course of his wanderings he at last came to Kurukṣetra. Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related the Baladevatīrthayātrā . Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related Beholding Bala Rāma, Duryodhana rejoiced. According to the proposal of Bala Rāma, Yudhiṣṭhira with his brothers and Duryodhana proceeded westwards to Samanta pañcaka on the southern side of the Sarasvatī. . and Cā. praised Duryodhana. Description of Bhīma and Duryo dhana . Duryodhana told Yudhiṣṭhira to behold the battle, protected by the Kaikeyas, etc. . That large assembly of kings sat n, as did also Bala Rāma, who was worshipped by all around him. Bhīma and Duryodhana stood inciting each other with violent speeches . The dispute between the two heroes . At last Duryodhana said, What is the use of bragging fight with me, and was applauded by the Somakas, etc. The elephants grunted aloud and the steeds neighed repeatedly the weapons of the Pāṇḍavas blazed forth of their own accord . Description of the combat G and men wondered the Pāṇḍavas and the Somakas feared ating the manœuvre called Kauśika, Duryodhana baffled Bhīmas mace as Duryodhana once fell n to the earth, the Sṛñjayas cried aloud, so also did the Pāṇḍavas Bhīmasena then had his coat of mail fractured and was prostrated on the ground, but rose, steadying himself with great effort . Arjuna inquired of Kṛṣṇa about the relative merits of the two combatants Kṛṣṇa said that their training had been equal, but Bhīma was superior in strength Duryodhana was superior in skill and had had more practice by fighting fairly Bhīma would never succeed in winning, but by fighting unfairly he would surely be able to slay Duryodhana, just as the Asuras were vanquished by the gods, Virocana and Vṛtra by Indra with the aid of deception Bhīma has vowed to break the thighs of Duryo dhana with his mace let him accomplish that vow of his he censured Yudhiṣṭhira for his folly, and quoted a verse uttered by Uśanas Duryodhana has practised with the mace for full thirteen years. Arjuna struck his own left thigh before the eyes of Bhīmasena, who understood the sign. As Duryodhana set his heart on the manœuvre called dvasthāna and jumped upwards, Bhīmasena hurled his mace at the thighs of Duryodhana and fractured them. Portents appeared showers of blood and showers of dust were poured by Indra a loud noise was made by Y Rā and Pś. the Pāñcālas and the Pāṇḍavas were filled with anxiety G Si and Cā. went away . The Pāṇḍavas and Somakas rejoiced Bhīmasena rebuked Duryo dhana, and touched his head with his left foot, which was censured by Yudhiṣṭhira, who grieved for Duryodhana Baladevas wrath was excited upon seeing Duryo dhana struck below the navel he rushed on to slay Bhīma, but was seized and pacified by Kṛṣṇa . Baladeva praised Duryodhana and cursed Bhīmasena, and then ascended his chariot and proceeded towards Dvārakā. The Pāñcālas, etc became dejected Kṛṣṇa and Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīmasena, etc and Duryodhana spoke about what had passed . Celestial showers descended on Duryodhanas head G Aps and Si. praised him. The Pāṇḍavas and Kṛṣṇa became ashamed but Kṛṣṇa justified the use of unfair means for the slaughter of the Kuru warriors . The Pāṇḍava warriors proceeded to the Kuru camp, which was entirely deserted Kṛṣṇa caused Arjuna to take n the Gāṇḍīva and his inexhaustible quivers, and then to dismount then Kṛṣṇa also dismounted the celestial ape disappeared, and the chariot, with its steeds, etc was reduced to ashes. Kṛṣṇa congratulated Yudhiṣṭhira on his victory, and Yudhiṣṭhira attributed that victory to Kṛṣṇas power . In the encampment of the Kurus they found great wealth at Kṛṣṇas suggestion the Pāṇḍavas and Sātyaki resolved to pass the night at a spot outside the camp, on the banks of the Oghavatī. They then dispatched Kṛṣṇa to Hāstinapura in order to pacify the wrath of Gāndhārī, and to comfort her and Dhṛtarāṣṭra. He set out with Dāruka upon his chariot, yoked with Śaibya and Sugrīva . Asked by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana said that the reason why Yudhi ṣṭhira sent Kṛṣṇa to Hāstinapura was his fear that Gāndhārī, by means of her ascetic merit, should reduce the Pāṇḍavas to ashes, because Duryodhana had been slain unfairly Vyāsa will be there. Kṛṣṇa caused Dāruka to equip his chariot, and quickly set out for Hāstinapura. He arrived at Dhṛtarāṣṭras palace, where Vyāsa had arrived before him he comforted Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Gāndhārī, who said that her heart had again become steady . Then Kṛṣṇa came to know the evil that was meditated by Aśvatthāman, and suddenly took leave, requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Gāndhārī to protect the Pāṇḍavas, and proceeded with Dāruka. Vyāsa comforted Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Kṛṣṇa arrived at the camp and informed the Pāṇḍavas . Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya narrated the lamentations of Duryodhana while lying on the field with his thighs broken he thought himself happy, and asked Sañjaya to bring his message to his parents and to Aśvatthāman, etc and took leave of the message bearers he was confident that Cārvāka, the mendicant devotee, would avenge his death. Thousands of men, with eyes full of tears, fled away the earth trembled, etc. The messengers went and informed Aśvatthāman and then went away . Aśvatthāman, etc came to Duryodhana, who lay surrounded by carnivorous animals, etc. Aśvatthā mans lament and Duryodhanas reply Aśvatthāman vowed to slay all the Pāñcālas Duryodhana let Kṛpa install Aśvatthāman as the Kuru generalissimo then they took leave of Duryodhana and left him alone .
Gādheyī = Satyavatī, .
Gādhi or Gādhin, a king of Kānyakubja, the son of Kuśika and the father of Viśvāmitra and Satyavatī . n, . b, . b, . c, . Kauśika.
Gādhija = Viśvāmitra, .
Gādhin, v. Gādhi.
Gādhinandana = Viśvāmitra, .
Gādhisutā = Satyavatī, .
Gadin = Śiva .
Gaganamūrdhan, an Asura .
Gahana = Viṣṇu .
Gaja, a Gāndhāra warrior, the younger brother of Śakuni .
Gajaśiras, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Gajahan = Śiva .
Gajāhvaya = Hāstinapura, .
Gajakarṇa, a Yakṣa .
Gajānīka, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Gajapura = Hāstinapura, .
Gajarāja = Airāvata, .
Gajasāhvaya = Hāstinapura, .
Gajendra = Airāvata, .
Gajendrakarṇa = Śiva .
Gajodara, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Gālava, a ṛṣi . ff . b, . b, . b, . Pañcāla, Pāñcāla.
. In ancient times, in order to try Viśvāmitra, who was then engaged in ascetic austerities, Dharma in the form of the Ṛṣi Vasiṣṭha, and feigning him self hungry, came to his hermitage. Viśvāmitra cooked caru, but could not approach Dharma before his guest had dined with the other hermits. Dharma said, have already dined wait here, and went away. Viśvāmitra, bearing that food on his head and himself subsisting on air, waited a hundred years, while the ascetic Gālava waited on him. Then Dharma accepted that food, which was still warm and fresh, and called Viśvāmitra a viprarṣi, whereby he became a brahman. Gālava repeatedly asked Viśvāmitra to take a gift from him as his preceptor, and at last Viśvāmitra, seeing his persistency, requested him to give white steeds each with one black ear . Gālava got troubled and was gradually reduced to a skeleton. He thought of repairing to Viṣṇu, when his friend Garuḍa came, and said he had spoken to Viṣṇu in his behalf, and that he would bear him . Garuḍa described the East here Savitṛ first rises, and the tapas of the Sādhyas is performed at eve...the two eyes of Dharma...here the daughters of Dakṣa in primeval times gave birth to their children, and here the sons of Kaśyapa first multiplied here Śakra was first anointed as king of the gods here is the tapas of Indra and the gods, all their religious ceremonies here the Creator first sang the Vedas here Sāvitrī was first said by Savitṛ to the reciters of the Vedas, and here the Yajurveda was given by Sūrya here the Soma juice was first drunk by the gods, etc. it was here that Varuṇa, repairing to Pātāla, obtained prosperity here the birth, growth, and death of the ancient Vasiṣṭha took place here first grew the hundred branches of oṃ here the Munis called dhūmapāḥ first imbibed the smoke of the havis here the thousand rayed Sun slays, rising, the wicked and ungrateful men and Asuras here is the gate of the three worlds and the path to heaven and to felicity . Garuḍa menṭioned the remarkable subjects in the South Pitṛpakṣas trailokasya Ūṣmapāḥ devāḥ the Viśvedevas with the Pitṛs, with whom they equally share the sacrifices in all the worlds the second r of Dharma... the Devarṣis, Pitṛlokarṣis, and Rājarṣis, who dwell here in great happiness... it is the region whither all must repair...there are Nairṛtāḥ to be seen by the sinful the Gandharvas chanting on Mandara and in the abodes of the viprarṣis Raivata who, hearing the Sāmans, retired to the woods, leaving wife and friends and king Sāvarṇi and Yāvakrīta setting a limit to Sūrya Rāvaṇa soliciting immortality from the gods Vṛtra incurring the enmity of Śakra Vaitaraṇī filled with the bodies of persons condemned to hell... reaching this region the sun drops sweet water, and thence, proceeding again to the Vāsiṣtha direction, once more drops dew there is Garuḍa obtaining for food an enormous elephant and tortoise the great Ṛṣi Cakradhanus birth from Sūrya took place here the perfect brahmans, named Śivāḥ, who fully had mastered the Vedas, here obtained liberation here is Bhogavatī, ruled by Vāsuki, Takṣaka, and Airāvata. Those that have to journey hither encounter here a thick gloom, so that it cannot be penetrated by either the Sun or by Agni even thou shalt have to pass this road . Garuḍa mentioned the remarkable subjects and occurrences of the West Varuṇas origin his instalment by Kaśyapa the Moon, quaffing all the six juices of Varuṇa, becomes young again in the beginning of the bright fortnight the Daityas being routed and bound fast by Vāyu the mountain Asta Night and Sleep Śakra beholding the goddess Diti asleep, and cutting off her fœtus, whence sprang the Maruts the roots of Himavat stretching towards the eternal Mandara, the end of which is not to be reached by journeying for even, years Surabhi milking on the shores of the lake with golden lotuses in the midst of the Ocean the headless trunk of Svarbhānu the chanting of the Vedas by Suvarṇa śiras Dhvajavatī, the daughter of the muni Harimedhas, remaining in the air in consequence of Sūryas injunction, stay...the sources of the rivers here, in the abode of Varuṇa, are the waters of the three worlds the abode of Ananta, and of Viṣṇu, and of Pavana, and of the Maharṣi Kaśyapa Mārīca . The North has its name from saving from sin it is also called madhyama, i.e. between the East and the West. None can live there that is unamiable, etc. Garuḍa mentioned its remarkable subjects and places Badarī, the asylum of Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Jiṣṇu, and Brahmán Maheśvara with the effulgence of the yugānta fire Puruṣa dwelling with Prakṛti, invisible to munis, . with G Y and Si except Nara and Nārāyaṇa there Viṣṇu appears alone, having, heads and, legs there Candramas was installed in the sovereignty over the brahmans Mahādeva receiving Gaṅgā on his head Devī practising austerities for obtaining Maheśvara Kāma the wrath here took place Kuberas instalment, on the breast of Kailāsa, in the sovereignty of Rā Y and G. Caitraratha here is the asylum of the Vaikhānasas Mandākinī Mandara Saugandhikavana, guarded by Nairṛtas the plantain forest, etc. the Siddhas the seven Ṛṣis with Arundhatī Svāti Brahmán near Yajña... the munis named Dhāmā guarding Gāyantikādvāra the man who passes beyond them will certainly meet with destruction, except Nārāyaṇa and Nara or Jiṣṇu here is Kailāsa, the abode of Ailavila the origin of the ten Apsarases Vidyut prabhāḥ Viṣṇupada, made by Viṣṇu, when he, in his covering the worlds with three steps, stepped on the northern region here took place king Maruttas sacrifice at Uśīrabīja, by the side of the golden lake here was Himavats gold mine, that exhibited itself to the viprarṣi Jīmūta, who gave away the whole wealth to the brahmans, and had it called after his name here morning and evening the Lokapālas
Gālavasambhava = Prākśṛṅgavat, .
Gālavi = Prākśṛṅgavat, .
Gama = Śiva .
Gambhīra = Śiva .
Gambhīrabalavāhana = Śiva .
Gambhīraghoṣa = Śiva .
Gaṇa = Śiva .
Gaṇā, a mātṛ. u, .
Gaṇādhipa = Śiva .
Gaṇādhyakṣa = Śiva, .
Gaṇakāra = Śiva .
Gaṇakartṛ = Śiva .
Gaṇanayaka = Gaṇeśa, .
Gaṇapati = Śiva .
Gaṇḍā, the wife of the śūdra Paśusakha. b, .
Gaṇḍaka, pl a people .
Gaṇḍakaṇḍa, a Yakṣa .
Gaṇḍakī, a river. b, .
Gaṇḍalin = Śiva .
Gaṇḍasāhvayā, a river .
Gandha1, . = Śiva .
Gandhadhārin = Śiva .
Gandhakālī = Satyavatī, .
Gandhamādana, a mountain . b, . b G. is frequented by Kimpuruṣas, Siddhas, Cāraṇas, Vidyā dharas, Kinnarīs, etc . e, . d, . e On the summits of G. Kubera, the lord of the Guhyakas, many Rākṣasas and Apsarases live in joy. Beside G. there are many smaller mountains and hills. The measure of human life there is, years. There the men are cheerful and endued with great energy and strength, and the women are all of the complexion of the lotus and highly beautiful, . d, . b, . b, . b, . e, . b, .
Gandhamādana2, a monkey chief .
Gandhamādana3 = Rāvaṇa, .
. Yudhiṣṭhira in vain proposed that Bhīma should return with Kṛṣṇā, Sahadeva, Dhaumya, the charioteers, cooks, etc to Gaṅgā dvāra, while Yudhiṣṭhira should proceed with Nakula and Lomaśa. Bhīma promised to carry Kṛṣṇā and the twins. Kṛṣṇā said that she would be able to go. They entrusted to the Pulinda king Subāhu on the Himavat, the servants Indrasena, etc the cooks and stewards, and Draupadīs accoutrements, and began to proceed . Yudhiṣṭhira complained to Bhīma that he had not seen Arjuna for five years. They now should, in company with brahmans of strict vows, enter Gandhamādana, etc. . Exhorted by Lomaśa, when they were about to go to the mountain Mandara, they aed Ākāśagaṅgā, and then proceeded with the ṛṣis. Then they saw the bones of the Daitya Naraka like to a white mountain. bis Varāhāvatāra, . As they, with the brahmans, entered Gandhamādana a terrible wind arose, followed by showers of rain, lightning, and torrents, during which they took shelter under trees, etc Sahadeva carrying the sacred fire . When the tempest was over and the sun reappeared, they continued their journey . When they had proceeded only a krośa, Draupadī sank n. Nakula ran forward and supported her, and the others hastily came, and Yudhiṣṭhira took her on his lap and lamented. Dhaumya and the other brahmans comforted and blessed him, and by reciting mantras capable of dispelling Rākṣasas, and by performing ceremonies, while she was touched and fanned by the Pāṇḍavas, they made her regain her senses. The twins pressed her feet with their hands. Bhīma promised Yudhiṣṭhira to carry them all over the snowy mountains, or Ghaṭotkaca will carry us all. With Yudhiṣṭhiras permission Bhīma thought of Ghaṭotkaca, who immediately came and was embraced by Bhīma . Ghaṭotkaca carried Kṛṣṇā through the air, and hundreds of other Rākṣasas carried the Pāṇḍavas and the brahmans, while Lomaśa moved along the path of the Siddhas. So they proceeded through regions inhabited by Mlecchas, Vidyā dharas, monkeys, Kinnaras, Kimpuruṣas, Gandharvas, etc and the northern Kurus, towards Kailāsa and Badarī, where they were received by the numerous ṛṣis, and where they dwelt, beholding Maināka, Hiraṇyaśikkara, Bindusaras, and Bhāgīrathī, and offering oblations, etc.
Gandhapāḥ, a class of gods .
Gandhapālin = Śiva .
Gāndhāra, pl a people . Gāndhā raka, pl. Gāndhari, pl.
Gāndhāra1, name of a note, .
Gāndhāra2 = Śakuni, .
Gāndhāra3 = Śiva .
Gāndhāra, dual = Acala and Vṛṣaka, .
Gāndhārādhipati, a certain king of the Gāndhāras .
Gāndhāraka1, pl a people = Gāndhāra, pl .
Gāndhāraka2, adj. .
Gāndhāramukhya, dual = Acala and Vṛṣaka, .
Gāndhārapati = Śakuni, .
Gāndhārarāj = Śakuni, .
Gāndhārarāja1 = Śakuni, .
Gāndhārarāja2 = Subala, .
Gāndhārarāja3 = the father of Gāndhārī, the wife of Kṛṣṇa, .
Gāndhārarāja4 = the son of Śakuni, .
Gāndhārarājaduhitṛ = Gāndhārī, .
Gandhārarājaputra = Śakuni, .
Gāndhārarājaputra = the son of Śakuni, .
Gandhārarājasya putra = Śakuni, .
Gāndhārarājasya putra = Śakuni, .
Gāndhārarājasya suta = Cakuni, .
Gāndhāri = Duryodhana, q.v.
Gāndhāri, pl a people .
Gāndhārī, the daughter of the Gāndhāra king Subala, the wife of Dhṛtarāṣṭra1, and the mother of Duryodhana, etc . also the following synonyms Gāndhārarājaduhitṛ, q.v. Saubaleyī, . Saubalī, . Subalajā, . Subalasya putrī, . Subalasyātmajā, . Subalātmajā, .
Gāndhārī, wife of Ajamīḍha .
Gāndhārī, a goddess .
Gāndhārī, wife of Kṛṣṇa .
Gāndhārīputra = Duryodhana, q.v.
. One day Dvaipāyana, gratified with Gāndhārīs hospitality, granted her the boon that she should have sons . She had borne the burden in her womb for two years, when she heard that Kuntī had brought forth a son she then struck her womb violently, and there came out a hard mass of flesh like an iron ball. When she was about to throw it away, Vyāsa appeared and caused her to put the ball of flesh, sprinkled with cool water and divided into parts, into pots filled with clarified butter, which were placed in a concealed spot. After having said that she should open the covers of the pots after two years, Vyāsa retired to Himavat in order to devote himself to asceticism. Duryodhana was younger than Yudhiṣṭhira, being born on the same day as Bhīma. As soon as Duryodhana was born he began to cry like an ass, and ill portending omens appeared. Vidura, etc in vain told Dhṛtarāṣṭra to aban him. Within a month the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra and one daughter were born. During the pregnancy of Gāndhārī, Dhṛtarāṣṭra begot the Karaṇa Yuyutsu upon a maidservant of the Vaiśya class .
Gandharva1, pl the celestial musicians or singers āpsarasāṃ...aṃśāvatāraṇaṃaṃśāvatāraṇaṃ... deva GāpsarasāṃDuṣyantaaṃśāvatāranaṃ...Gāpsarasāṃāpsarasāṅ gaṇaiḥNahuṣaoraga RākṣasānYayātisurarṣi G naraKarṇasambhavaoraga RakṣasāṃPāṇḍuākrīḍabhūmiṃ devānāṃ Gāpsarasāṃ tathā, in the northArjunaāpsarasaḥ, present at the birth of ArjunaenumerationSambhavap.trivarṣakṛtayajñas tu Gāṇāṃ upaplave...SauvīraḥHiḍimbavadhap.Caitrarathap.muhūrtaṃ...vihitaṃ kāmacārāṇāṃ Yakṣa G Rakṣasāṃjānām aśvānāṃ, Citraratha gives horses, born among the G to each of the Pāṇḍavasdeva Gvāhāḥ, sc. hayāḥjāḥ...hayāḥYakṣa Rākṣasa Gāḥ, know the history of the KurusTapatyup.giriśreṣṭhe deva GseviteSvayaṃvarap.Viśvāvasur Nārada Parvatau ca Gmukhyāḥ, present at the svayaṃvara of Draupadīdevarṣi Gsamākulaṃ...antarīkṣaṃSunasun.deva G Yakṣāṇāṃ... sarvaratnāniSubhadrāharaṇap.musicians, PCR.Gāṇḍīvadeva Dānava Gaiḥ, pūjitaṃ, sc. GāṇḍīvaṃKhāṇḍavadah.attack Kṛṣṇa and ArjunaYakṣa Rākṣasa G nara Kinnara pannagaiḥSabhākrīyap.āpsarasaḥ, together with Citrasena, present in the palace of YudhiṣṭhiraLokapālasabhākhy.in the palace of YudhiṣṭhiraŚakra sabhāv.in the palace of IndraYamasabhāv.in the palace of YamaVaruṇasabhāv.āpsarasāṃ gaṇaiḥ, in the palace of VaruṇaVaiśravaṇasabhāv.in the palace of Kuberaāpsarasāṅ gaṇāḥ, Kinnarā nāma Gā Narā nāma tathāpare, āṇāṃ patayaḥ, sc. Viśvāvasu, etc.Brahmasabhāv.āpsarasāṃ gaṇāḥ, in the palace of Brahmánāpsarasaḥ, Lokapāla sabhākh.āpsarasaḥ, in the palace of Kuberain the palace of IndraArjunarakṣitaṃ deśaṃ, in the north, conquered by ArjunaSūryaSiddha Cāraṇa Gāḥ, follow the chariot of the SunDvaitavanaprav.āpsarasāṃ, sc. lokaṃDraupadīparitāpav.āsura RākṣasāḥIndralokābh.accompanied Indrain the world of IndraTumburuśreṣṭhāḥSiddha Cāraṇa GaiḥTīrthayātrāp.āpsarasaḥ, in PuṣkaraVaḍavāāpsarasāṃ gaṇaiḥ, in VaḍavāKuru kṣetraāpsarasaḥ, in KurukṣetraTīrthayātrāp.Siddha Cāraṇa Gāḥ, in SaugandhikavanaSindhoḥ prabhavaṃ...Siddha GsevitaṃSiddha Cāraṇa G mānuṣāḥ, in GokarṇaPrayāgain PrayāgaDhaumyatīrthak.Yakṣa Rakṣobhiḥ...sevitaṃ...śailaṃGaṅgāBhāgīrathī...deva GsevitāParaśurāmaseen in the body of Rāma DāśarathiAgastyop.manuṣyo aga G Yakṣa Kimpuruṣāḥdevāḥ sa GmahoragāḥtūryeṣuSagaraRākṣasānGaṅgāvataraṇaoraga YakṣāḥMandaraon MandaraGandhamādanapr.Skanākhyānadeva GgītaiḥManuṣyagrahak.āṇāṃ yā mātā sā garbhaṃ gṛhya gacchatiāś cāpi yaṃ divyāḥ saṃviśanti naraṃ bhuvi unmadyati sa tu kṣipraṃ graho Gāndharva eva saSkandayuddhaGhoṣayātrāp.sainyānāṃkāmarūpinaḥDuryodhana and his brothers were made captives by the G headed by Citrasena, but were liberated by the PāṇḍavasKarṇadigvijayaāṇāṃ tadā raṇāt, all. to MudgalaāpsarasaḥRāmopākhyānap.devāsurataḥYakṣānugataḥ, sc. Kuberadeva G DānavāḥSītā Rāvaṇasaṃv.ānāṃ yoṣitāḥ, wives of RāvaṇaāpsarasaḥRāvaṇavadhadeva Gāḥtridaśāḥ saha G CāraṇaiḥRāmābhiṣeka deva G Yakṣāṇāṃsa devāsura GāḥĀraṇeyap.Pāṇḍavapr.Virāṭa considers Bhīmasena to be either the king of the Gandharvas or IndraDraupadī says that she is the wife of five G.putrā Grājasya mahāsattvasya kasyacit, varopamaḥ, i.e. NakulaKīcakavadhap.patayo mama, i.e. Draupadīspatayas tava, i.e. Draupadīsāṇām ahaṃ bhāryā pañcānāṃ, says Draupadīpatibhir mama, i.e. Draupadīs, said to have slain KīcakarājāyaGoharaṇap.deva Dānava Gaiḥ pūjitaṃ, sc. Gāṇḍīvamrājapratimaṃ, sc. Arjunaall. to deva Yakṣa G mahoragasamākulaṃ... maṇḍalaṃcame to see the encounter between Bhīṣma and Arjunaāpsarasaḥ, applauded ArjunaYudhiṣṭhira YakṣapravarāḥIndravijayaPitṛ G Bhūtānāṃāpsarasāṃ gaṇāḥjagat ...sāsura Gṃdeva Dānava GāḥDevarṣi Gaiḥmukhyāḥāpsarasāṃ gaṇaiḥSañjayayānap.Yakṣāpasarasaḥputrapratimaṃ, sc. AśvatthāmanSanatsujātap.āṇāṃ...rūpaṃYānasandhip.Gandhamādanaṃ...Siddha GsevitaṃMātalīyop.Gālavacaritagāyanti gāthā Gāś cittabuddhiharāḥ, in the southYakṣa Siddhaiḥ, cannot see Puruṣaruled by Kuberabahu Gdarśanā, sc. MādhavīmṛgapakṣiṇāṃYayātiapsarasāṃ gaṇaiḥ, worship YayātiBhaga vadyānap.had been vanquished by Arjuna, all. to oraga Rākṣasāḥappeared in the body of KṛṣṇaSainyaniryāṇap.had been vanquished by Arjuna, all. to Rathātirathas.deva G mānuṣānAmbopākhyānap.āpsarasaḥ, on the mountain Mahendrapresent at the encounter between Bhīṣma and Rāma JāmadagnyaJambūkh.āsura Rākṣasāḥ. on Meru on the mountain NiṣadhaŚākadvīpaon Meru in ŚākadvīpaBhūmip.deva Gāḥ, in Kuśadvīpadeśāḥ...deva Gsevitāḥ, in Krauñcadvīpa.Bhagavadgītāp.āṇāṃ Citrarathaḥ, sc. asmi, says KṛṣṇaYakṣāsura SiddhasaṅghāḥBhīṣmavadhap.came to see the battledeva Gāḥdevāḥ sa Gāḥsadevāsura Gair lokaiḥdeva Dānava Gāḥ, applaud Arjunadeva GāḥDevarṣi Gāḥdeva Brahmarṣi Gāndevāh sa Gāḥ, had come to see the battledeva G Rākṣasāḥdevāḥ sa Gāḥsadevāsura Gaṃ lokaṃAbhimanyuvadhap.sasurāsura Gāḥ...lokāḥGandharvāstraTumburupramukhebhyaḥ, from them Arjuna had obtained the Gāndharvam astraṃ by means of tapasAbhimanyuvadhap.deva Dānava Gān Mṛtyur haratiṢoḍaśarāj v. Paurava naṭanartana Gaiḥ, present at the sacrifice of Paurava, singers, PCR v. Bhagīrathasung a gāthā, v. Māndhātṛoragapakṣiṇaḥ, came to the sacrifices of Māndhātṛ, v. Pṛthu Vainyaāpsarasaḥthe G. and Apsarases milked perfumes from the earth into a vessel made of a lotus leaf Citraratha became their calf and Viśvaruci their milkerPratijñāp.sa Gāḥ...lokāḥsingers, PCR.Jayadrathavadhap.devāḥ sa GāḥCāraṇāḥ saha Gāḥ. applaud Sātyakidevān sa Gān, had been vanquished by Arjuna, all. to applaud Karṇa and Bhīmasenadeva Dānava Gāḥdevāsura Gāḥdeva G DānavāḥGhaṭotkacavadhap.Siddha G Piśācasaṅghāḥ, applaud Aśvatthā manhriyamāṇe tadā, Karṇa, Gair Dhṛta rāṣṭraje, all. to deva G Yakṣāṇāṃdevaiḥ...sa Daitya Yakṣa GaiḥDevarṣi G surarṣisaṅghāḥYakṣāḥdeva Gsamā kulaṃdeva Gdīpādyaiḥdeva G DānavaḥDroṇavadhap.ā ghoṣayātrāyāṃ Citrasenādayo jitāḥ, all. to in the welkinNārāyaṇāstramokṣaṇap.deva Dānava Gās trastāḥNārāyaṇaYakṣāndeva GyoniṣuNārāyaṇāstramokṣap. āpsarasaḥ, worship the linga of ŚivaTripurā khyānapraised ŚivaKarṇap.Dvaitavane...Gaiḥ samabhidrutaḥ... tvaṃ i.e. Karṇa prathamaṃ palāyitaḥ, all. to Citrasenamukhān, were vanquished by Arjuna, Page2 b derān sa Gānsadevāsura Gāṃs trīṃl lokāndeva Dānava Gāḥ ʹTumburumukhāḥ, sided with Arjuna
Gandharva2, dual = Hāhā and Hūhū, .
Gandharva3, sg . b, . Names of individual Gandharvas Aṅgāraparṇa, . Citrāṅgada, . Citrasena, . Dhṛtarāṣṭra, . Tumburu, . Viśvāvasu, .
Gandharva4 = Śiva .
Gāndharva, adj. .
Gāndharva . b, .
Gandharvaloka .
Gandharvanagara . c, .
Gandharvāṇāṃ cīrthaṃ, a tīrtha on the Sarasvatī. d There many Gandharvas, headed by Viśvāvasu and possessed of ascetic merits, pass their time singing and dancing, . Gandharvatīrtha.
Gandharvapati1 = Devaka, .
Gandharvapati2 = Haṃsa, .
Gandharvapati3 = Aṅgāraparṇa, .
Gandharvarāj1 = Citrasena
Gandharvarāj2 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra3, .
Gandharvarāja1 = Viśvāvasu, .
Gandharvarāja2 = Citrāṅgada, .
Gandharvarāja3 = Angāraparṇa, .
Gandharvārāja4 = Citrasena, .
Gandharvarāja5 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra3, .
Gandharvarājan1 = Citrasena, .
Gandharvarājan2 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra3, .
b By practising ascetic penances Arjuna had obtained the G. from the Gandharvas
Gandharvatīrtha = Gandharvāṇāṃ tīrthaṃ, .
Gandharvendra = Vicvāvasu, .
Gandharvī, the mother of the horses .
Gandharvī .
Gandhavatī = Satyavatī, q.v.
Gandhavatīsuta = Vyāsa, .
Gāṇḍīva, the bow of Arjuna . b, . c, . Gāṇḍīvabhṛt, Gāṇḍīvadhanvan, Gāṇḍīvadhārin, Gāṇḍivin = Arjuna, q.v.
Gaṇeśa1, a god . Gaṇanāyaka, Gaṇeśāna, Heramba, Vighneśa.
Gaṇeśa2 = Śiva, .
Gaṇeśāna = Gaṇeśa, .
Gaṇeśvara = Viṣṇu .
Gaṅgā, the river Ganges v . . . f, . b, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, . b, . b, . f, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . m, . b, . l, . g, . Ākāśagaṅgā, Bhagīrathasutā, Bhāgīrathī, Śailarājasutā, Śailasutā, Devanadī, Haimavatī, Jāhnavī, Jahnukanyā, Jahnusutā, Samudramahiṣī, Tripathagā, Tripathagāminī.
Gaṅgā = Śiva .
Gāṅga, adj. .
Gaṅgādvāra, name of the place where the Gangā enters the plains . i, . b, . b, . f By bathing in G. and Kuśāvarta and Bilvaka on Nīlaparvata, and also in Kanakhala one is freed from his sins and ascends to heaven by bathing in Apāṃ hradaḥ one obtains the merit of a horse sacrifice. Gaṅgā flows in a northerly direction by bathing in Tristhāna, which belongs to Maheśvara, during a month, one becomes able to see the godsĀnuśāsanik .
Gaṅgāhrada, a tīrtha . o
Gaṅgāmahādvāra, v. Gāyantikādvāra.
Gaṅgāsuta = Skanda, .
Gaṅgātoyārdramūrdhaja = Śiva .
. Asked by Sagara to bring back the horse and deliver him from hell, Aṃśumat went to the spot where the earth had been excavated, entered the sea by that very way, and beheld Kapila and the horse. As he bowed his head before Kapila, etc Kapila granted him the horse, and that his fathers should be purified and go to heaven, when his sons son, by the favour of Śiva, brought Tripathagā from heaven. When he had brought the horse back to the sacrificial yard and narrated all the events to Sagara, Sagara grieved no more, but praised Aṃśumat and finished the sacrificial rites. Sagara was greeted by all the gods and converted the sea into a son of himself, and after a long reign placed his grandson on the throne and ascended to heaven. Aṃśumat ruled the whole earth like Sagara, and died after he had placed his son Dilīpa on the throne. Dilīpa in vain tried to effect the descent of Gaṅgā in order to raise his forefathers. He then anointed his son Bhagīratha as king, and practised austerities in the forest, and then ascended to heaven . Bhagīratha made over his kingly duties to his minister, and practised austerities on the Himavat during celestial years, living upon fruits, roots, and water. Then Gaṅgā Haimavatī appeared in a material form, and promised to besprinkle the bodies of his forefathers and carry them to heaven, and as there existed none in the three worlds except Śiva, who was able to sustain her fall, she caused Bhagīratha to go to Kailāsa, where he, by his austerities, obtained the favour of Śiva, who, surrounded by his awful attendants, came to Himavat. There he caused Bhagīratha to pray to Gaṅgā. Gaṅgā immediately came n from the sky, in the presence of the gods, maharṣis, Gandharvas, snakes, and Yakṣas, and Śiva received her on his forehead, whence she fell to the earth, divided into three streams. At her request Bhagīratha led her to the spot where the bodies of Sagaras sons lay, while Śiva went to Kailāsa with the celestials. Gaṅgā filled the sea, and Bhagīratha ated her as his daughter and offered libations of water to his forefathers .
Gaṅgā Yamunayos tīrtham, a tīrtha. p By bathing in G. and at the mountain Kalañjara and offering to the Pitṛs, one obtains the merit of ten horse sacrifices by bathing in Ṣaṣṭihrada one obtains great merit on the day of full moon in the month of Māgha thirty millions and ten thousands of tīrthas come together in Prayāga, and by bathing there during the month of Māgha one attains to heaven, .
Gāṅgeya1 = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Gāṅgeya2 = Skanda, .
Gāṅgeya3, adj .
Gaṅgodbheda, a tīrtha .
Gaṇita, a Viśvadeva .
Garbhacārin = Śiva .
Garbhamāṃsaśṛgāla = Śiva .
Gardabhi, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Garga, a ṛṣi. e, . ii, . f, .
Garga, pl a family of ṛṣis .
Gargasrotas, a tīrtha on the Sarasvatī. e At G. Garga, of venerable years and purified by way of ascetic penances, obtained the knowledge of time and its course, of the movements of the stars, and of all auspicious and unauspicious portents thence its name G. there the ṛṣis always waited upon Garga in order to obtain a knowledge of time
Gārgya, one or more ṛṣis . b, . b, .
Gārgya, pl a people .
Gārhapatya, pl a class of Pitṛs .
Gariṣṭha, an ancient ṛṣi .
Garīyasāṃ gariṣṭha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Gārtsamada, adj. . b, .
Garuḍa, the son of Kaśyapa and Vinatā, the vehicle of Viṣṇu, or the emblem of his flagstaff . b In the meantime G. came out bursting the egg and ascended the skies. The gods thought that it was Agni, but were undeceivedĀstīkap.KadrūĀstīkap b, bNīl. and BR without reposingb, etymology guruṃ bhāraṃ samāsādyoḍḍīnaḥ, v. cPage3 b cf Vālakhilya, pl.by the penances of the Vālakhilyas G. had been born as the lord of winged creatures Āstīkap pakṣirāṭAṃśāvat.among the VainateyasVainateyaḥ, reckoned among the Ādityasāruṇau, sons of VinatāArjunapresent at the birth of ArjunaRājyalābhap.dvipakṣa Gprakhyair dvāraiḥArghāharaṇap.patatāṃ mukhaṃ, Ghoṣayātrāp.rathair GniḥsvanaiḥPāṇḍavapr.patatām iva, sc. varaḥYānasandhip.Kṛṣṇa identified with Ariṣṭanemi, Garuḍa, SuparṇaMātaliyop.ātmajāḥ, enumeration of his descendantsG. who wished to devour the serpent Sumukha was humiliated by Viṣṇu, who then threw Sumukha upon the breast or G.Gālavacaritathe friend of Gālava, whom he assisted in his search for horsesJambūkh.Vainateyaḥ ...Suparṇaḥ, Abhimanyuvadhap.pannagaiś chinnair Genevaānilaraṃhobhiḥ...hayaiḥJayadrathavadhap.udvavarha... pannagaṃ Go yathābhava Gottamāṅgayānaḥ, says Kṛṣṇa to BhūriśravasGhaṭotkacavadhap. TakṣakauNārāyaṇāstra mokṣaṇap.ānilaraṃhasaḥKarṇap.prahitair ugrair pañcāsyair uragair ivaturagān GānilaraṃhasaḥHaṃsakākīyop.sya gatau tulyāh, sc. haṃsāḥKarṇap.syeva patato jighṛkṣoḥ pannagottamaṃvājibhir Gopamaiḥsyeva patato pannagārthe yathā purāyathānāgaḥ svayaṃ ya āyād Gsya vaktraṃSkandacame to the investiture of Skandaānanāḥ, sc. the warriors of Skandagave his favourite son, a peacock, to SkandaUparicaracarried Uparicara up to the welkin, Anugītāp.rukmapakṣo nicitas trikoṇo Gākṛtiḥ
Garuḍa2, name of a vyūha .
Garuḍa, pl .
Gāruḍa, adj. .
Garuḍadhvaja = Kṛṣṇa, .
garuḍī, said of Svāhā, .
Garutmat = Garuḍa, .
Garutmat, pl .
Gatādhvara = Mahāpuruṣa .
Gatāgata = Śiva .
Gati = Śiva .
Gatisattama = Viṣṇu .
Gatitālin, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Gaura, a mountain .
Gauraśiras, a muni .
Gaurāśva, an ancient king .
Gauramukha, a disciple of Śamīka .
Gaurapṛṣṭha, an ancient king .
Gauravāhana, a king .
Gaurī = Umā, .
Gaurī, a goddess in the retinue of Umā .
Gaurī, the wife of Varuṇa . b, .
Gaurī, a river .
Gaurī = the Earth . b, .
Gaurīśa = Śiva, .
Gaurīhṛdayavallabha = Śiva, .
Gautama1, name of one or more ṛṣis . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . e Indra coveting Ahalyā was cursed by Gautama, but, for the sake of righteousness, he was not hurt, . g, . b, .
Gautama2 = Śaradvat, .
Gautama3 = Kṛpa, .
Gautama4 = Śiva .
Gautamī, name of one or more women . b, .
Gautamī = Jaṭilā, .
Gautamī = Kṛpī, .
Gautamī, a river . . b Bhīṣma said An old brahman lady named Gautamī found her son dead, bitten by a serpent an angry fowler, Arjunaka, bound the serpent with a string and brought it before Gautamī she told him to release it, as brahmans not harbour resentment, and there is no good in tormenting and killing an enemy the fowler mentioned how Indra killed Vṛtra and Mahādeva destroyed a sacrifice. The serpent said that Mṛtyu had sent him on this errand. Mṛtyu appeared and said that Kāla was the real promoter Sūrya, etc. are created and destroyed by Kāla. Kāla came and said that it was the childs karman that was the cause this was approved of by Gautamī and the fowler.
Gautaminandana = Aśvatthāman, .
Gautamīsuta = Aśvatthāman, .
Gavākṣa1, a monkey chief .
Gavākṣa2, a Gandhāra warrior, son of Subala and brother of Śakuni .
Gavalgana, the father of the sūta Sañjaya .
Gāvalgani = Sañjaya, q.v.
Gavām aya, name of a sacrifice, .
Gavāṃ bhavana, a tīrtha .
Gavāṃ loka, v. Goloka.
Gavāṃ pati = Śiva, .
Gavāṃ pati = Sūrya, .
Gavāṃ tīrtha, a tīrtha .
Gavaya, a monkey chief .
Gaveṣaṇa, a Vṛṣṇi prince .
Gavija, a muni .
Gavijāta = Gavija, .
Gaviṣṭha, an Asura .
Gaya1, an ancient king, son of Amūrtarayas . At Brahmasaras the rājarṣi G the son of Amūrtarayas, many times performed sacrifices distinguished by hundreds of mountains of food and thousands of lakes of clarified butter, many hundred rivers of curds, and streams of curries by the thousand at the time when the gifts were given nothing could be heard but the chaunting of the Vedas and in all lands people sung these songs In the sacrifice of Gaya, etc . b, . G. Āmūrtarayasa did not eat anything during a hundred years but remains from libations of clarified butter. Agni offered to grant him a boon. G. then desired to have a thorough knowledge of the Vedas through ascetic penances, etc inexhaustible wealth without injury to others, always to be able to make gifts to brahmans, and to have sons begotten of wives of his own order. In his horse sacrifice the sacrificial stakes were of gold decked with gems, and were given to the brahmans, etc. His sacrificial altar was yojanas long by yojanas broad and yojanas high, of solid gold, decked with pearls, etc. upon the completion of that sacrifice twenty five hills of food remained and also many lakes and rivulets of savoury drinks, etc. In consequence of his glory Gaya became renowned in the three worlds there is the eternal making banyan tree and Brahmasaras, . i, . b, . Āmūrtarayasa .
Gaya2, a sacred mountain . Gayā, Gayaśiras.
Gaya3, a monkey chief .
Gaya, pl a people, the inhabitants of Gayā . i, .
Gayā, a sacred place . s, .
Gayaśiras, a hill near Gayā . m, .
Gāyana, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Gāyantikādvāra, name of a place .
Gāyanti tvāṃ gāyatriṇaḥ = Śiva .
Gāyatrī, name of a metre, and also of a certain veṛse . d, . b, .
Gāyatrī = Śiva .
Gāyatryāḥ sthāna, a tīrtha.
Ghanaupama = Śiva .
Ghaṭajānuka, a muni.
Ghaṇṭa = Śiva .
Ghaṇṭakarṇa, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Ghaṇṭāmālāpriya = Śiva .
Ghaṇṭin = Śiva .
Ghaṭasṛñjaya, pl a people .
Ghaṭin = Śiva .
Ghaṭodara, an Asura .
Ghaṭotkaca, a Rākṣasa, son of Hiḍimbā and Bhīmasena Pāṇḍava G.s son Añjanaparvan is slain by Aśvatthāman, and G. himself is defeated by the sameRākṣasaḥRākṣasendraṃRākṣa sendraṃ, defeated by AśvatthāmanRākṣasātKṛṣṇa urged Gh. to proceed against Karṇaencounter with Alambuṣa, whom Gh. slewRākṣasaḥprāduś cakre tato māyāṃ Rākṣasīṃ Rākṣaseśvaraḥmāyāṃ Gh vinirmitāṃencounter with Karṇayādṛśenayathāencounter with Alāyudhaslew AlāyudhaGh. again proceeded against Karṇa, who slew him, hurling the dart which was given to him by Indra, and with which he had intended to slay Arjunahataṃśaktiṃ Ghenemāṃ vyaṃsayitvāmentioned among the slainnihataḥ, has hated the brahmans and the sacrificessā śaktir Vāsudevena vyaṃsitā ca Ghe e vyaṃsitāṃ, sc. śaktiṃhatvāvadhenahateRākṣasendreDroṇavadhap.nihateKarṇap.has been slain by Karṇahas slain Alambuṣaṃ Rākṣasendraṃ Śakraśaktyā nijaghnivān, sc. Karṇahataḥhate...RākṣaseŚalyap.RākṣasaṃGadāyuddhap.Page3 b vadhārthaṃ Pāṇḍuputrasya yācitāṃ śaktim eva caGe vyaṃsayaṭaḥ, sc. KṛṣṇaŚrāddhap.Rākṣasendraṃ, his body is crematedPutra darśanap.Rākṣasaḥ, among the dead warriors who, summoned by Vyāsa, arose from the GaṅgāSvargārohaṇap.after death Gh etc entered the gods and Yakṣasthe son of HiḍimbāBhaimaseniḥ...RākṣaseśvaraḥRākṣaseśvaraḥRākṣa sendraḥRākṣasau raudrakarmāṇau Hālam buṣauGhC. has by error Haiḍam
Ghaṭotkacasuta = Añjana parvan, .
Ghaṭotkacavadha .
. THE NIGHTLY COMBAT AFTER THE FOURTEENTH DAY A dreadful battle took place between the Pāñcālas and the Kauravas. Duryodhana. penetrated into the midst of the Pāṇḍava host, and caused an immense slaughter. Bhīmasena, etc. Duryodhana Yudhiṣṭhira made Duryodhana insensible Droṇa advanced to the rescue of Duryodhana the Pāṇḍavas Droṇa . Arjuna, etc. Droṇa. Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sañjaya about the battle . Sañjaya related Droṇa slew the Kaikeyas and the sons of Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc and Śibi Duryodhana sent Droṇa a driver for his chariot the Kaliṅga prince attacked Bhīma and was slain by Bhīma with his bare fiststhe brother of the Kaliṅga prince, Viśokaidescription of his chariotPage3 a, the father of Somadatta the brother of Karṇa with the Vāyavya weapon, abaning Yudhiṣṭhira, Pāñcālas, etc rallying the troops, Page3 b, with white steeds of the Sindhu breedBāhlīkas son, Description, advancing against Droṇaadvancing in order to get at Droṇaadvancing against Droṇaadvancing in order to slay Droṇaadvancing in order to slay Droṇa, ascending Śatānīkas chariotwith terrible looking Piśācas of equine faces yoked to his chariot description Kṛṣṇa, DhārtarāṣṭraPage3 a Dhārtarāṣṭra, proceeding towards DroṇaŚikhaṇḍin was carried away by his charioteerdescription, the Pāñcālas and Pāṇḍavas in order to rescue Droṇain order to rescue Dhṛṣṭadyumnaalso Duḥśāsana, etc having mounted the chariot of Kṛtavarman his son Ulūka, especially Droṇa and Karṇaespecially Yudhiṣṭhiradescription, and the Sṛñjayasdescriptionand Kṛṣṇawho had celestial weapons, as also those used by Rā. and As Page3 b, description, with Droṇa, etc. abaning Karṇadisregarding the advancing Karṇaabaning Ghaṭotkacawho fled away, abaning Karṇabrother of Baka having slain the Rā description, Page3 a
Ghora1, name of a weapon .
Ghora2, son of Aṅgiras. b, .
Ghora3 = Śiva .
Ghoraghoratara = Śiva .
Ghoraka, pl a people .
Ghoratapas = Śiva .
Ghorātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ghoṣa = Śiva .
Ghoṣayātrā = Ghoṣayātrāparvan .
ghoṣayātra, .
the rd of the minor parvans of Mhbhr. . When the Pāṇḍavas had arrived at the lake, and were dwelling in the woods visited by veda knowing ascetics, there came to them a brahman, who afterwards went away to Dhṛtarāṣṭra and told him how the Pāṇḍavas had become emaciated and reduced by wind and sun. Dhṛtarāṣṭra was much afflicted, considering that Yudhiṣṭhira, who had formerly used to sleep on beds of raṅku skins and to be wakened by sūtas and māgadhas, now slept on the bare ground he lamented the treatment he had permitted to be meted out to the Pāṇḍavas, and feared lest they would avenge themselves Arjuna, he thought, would not have left heaven, where he received the celestial weapons, if it were not for this purpose. This Śakuni told to Duryodhana, who was sitting with Karṇa, and Duryodhana was filled with grief . Śakuni and Karṇa proposed to Duryodhana that they should go to Dvaitavana to exult over the Pāṇḍavas . Duryodhana gladly approved the proposal, but feared that he might not obtain the permission of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who thought that the Pāṇḍavas had become more powerful than before in consequence of their ascetic austerities. He asked them, with Duḥśāsana, to find out some skilful pretext. The next morning Karṇa and Śakuni agreed with Duryodhana that they should go there under the pretext of supervising their cattle stations . They then all saw Dhṛta rāṣṭra. A cowherd, named Samaṅga, who had been instructed beforehand, came to the king and spoke to him of the cattle. Karṇa and Śakuni asked him to give permission to Duryodhana to go thither. Dhṛtarāṣṭra suggested to send some faithful men, fearing some collision with the Pāṇḍavas if they were to go thither themselves for though Yudhiṣṭhira would not suffer his wrath to be awakened, Bhīma and Draupadī were naturally passionate. Śakuni promised that they would not go to the spot where the Pāṇḍavas resided, and obtained the permission. Duryodhana then started with Karṇa, Duḥśāsana, Śakuni, etc and ladies by the thousand, followed by the citizens and their wives, with, chariots, etc and took up his quarters at the distance of a gavyūti from the lake of Dvaitavana . Having caused the calves to be marked, etc Duryodhana, etc began to sport and go a hunting, and came to the lake. Yudhiṣṭhira was then, together with Draupadī, celebrating the diurnal rājarṣi sacrifice according to the ceremonial used in the forest. When the attendants of Duryodhana came to the banks of the lake to construct pleasure houses, they were forbidden to enter by a number of Gandharvas, who told them that the king of the Gandharvas had come from the abode of Kubera, with his followers and several hosts of Apsarases, etc and when Duryodhana sent a number of his warriors, they also were prevailed upon by the Gandharvas to return . A battle ensued between the soldiers of Duryodhana and the Gandharvas, headed by their king Citrasena the soldiers of Duryodhana fled, except Karṇa, who killed hundreds of Gandharvas. Duryodhana, Śakuni, Duḥśāsana, and Vikarṇa returned to assist Karṇa, and the battle was renewed. Citrasena made use of illusion it seemed as if every warrior of the Kuru army were surrounded by ten Gandharvas. The entire army of Duryodhana again fled, except Karṇa. The Gandharvas then destroyed the chariot of Karṇa, who, mounting the chariot of Vikarṇa, was forced to drive away . Duryodhana refused to fly, but the Gandharvas destroyed his chariot and slew his charioteer and horses thereupon Citrasena took him prisoner, and Duḥśāsana, who was seated on his chariot, and Citrasena, Viviṃśati, Vinda, and Anuvinda, and the royal ladies, were taken by other Gandharvas, . The flying soldiers and ministers of Duryodhana took refuge with Yudhiṣṭhira . Yudhiṣṭhira, saying that the honour of the family was being destroyed by the Gandharvas seizing Duryodhana, etc in their presence, prevailed upon his brother to rescue Duryodhana, etc if possible, by conciliation or lightly skirmishing, otherwise by all means, Yudhiṣṭhira being prohibited from partaking in the combat by his sacrifice. Arjuna promised to rescue Duryodhana or kill the king of the Gandharvas . The four Pāṇḍavas, cased in mail and riding in chariots drawn by fleet horses, encountered the Gandharvas as these would not set Duryodhana, etc free, as requested by Arjuna, a fierce battle ensued . The Gandharvas, in vain, attempted to break the chariots of the Pāṇḍavas especially Arjuna, by means of his Āgneya weapon, sent millions of them to the abode of Yama. The Gandharvas then rose up to the skies, taking the Dhārtarāṣṭras with them, and showering maces, darts, etc upon Arjuna, who killed them with his weapons Sthūlākarṇa, Indrajāla, Saura, Āgneya, and Saumya. At last Citrasena rushed at Arjuna, armed with a mace of iron as Arjuna cut that mace in seven pieces with his arrows, Citrasena, by means of his science, concealed himself from the view of Arjuna, and thus continued to fight with him but Arjuna destroyed his power of concealing himself by shooting at him with his celestial arms guided by the sound . Then Citrasena showed himself to Arjuna, reminding him of his being his friend, and there was put an end to the battle . Citrasena related to Arjuna that, staying in his abode, he had become acquainted with the purpose of Duryodhana, etc and had been requested by Indra to bring Duryodhana thither in chains together with his counsellors. Arjuna entreated him to set Duryodhana free, but, at the request of Citrasena, they left it to be decided by Yudhiṣṭhira Yudhiṣṭhira then liberated all the Kauravas. The Gandharvas went away with the Apsarases, and Indra revived the slain Gandharvas by sprinkling amṛta upon them. Friendly admonished by Yudhiṣṭhira, Duryodhana, over whelmed with shame, returned to his capital . When Duryodhana, afflicted with grief, was approaching Hāstinapura with his army, Karṇa congratulated him on the honourable victory over the Gandharvas . Duryodhana told Karṇa that, as the Gandharvas had resorted to illusion and ascended the skies, he had been captured with his army, and that it was the Pāṇḍavas who had vanquished the Gandharvas . Duryodhana continued his narrative and declared that he would stay there abstaining from food, and that the others, headed by Duḥśāsana, should go to Hāstinapura. He then offered the royal power to Duḥśāsana. Duḥśāsana, his voice choked in tears, refused to accept it. Karṇa reproached them for weeping thus, and declared that the Pāṇḍavas, who resided in the inions of Duryodhana and enjoyed happiness under his protection, only did their duty in liberating him . Karṇa continued explaining his opinion, that those who resided in the kings realm should always exert themselves to the best of their ability for the king if the Pāṇḍavas had not followed Duryodhana to the battle it would have been an improper act on their part. Duryodhana, firmly resolved to leave the world, desired not to rise from where he sat . Śakuni reproached Duryodhana for his foolish despair, saying that he ought rather to reward the Pāṇḍavas by granting them their paternal king. Duryodhana embraced Duḥśāsana, but did not waver from his purpose he spread kuśa grass on the earth, etc and began to pray and worship mentally. The Daiteyas and Dānavas who had formerly been vanquished by the gods and were dwelling in Pātāla, having ascertained Duryodhanas purpose, commenced a sacrifice with formulas, revealed by Bṛhaspati and Uśanas, according to the rites indicated in the Atharvaveda and the Upaniṣad, assisted by brahmans of rigid vows, well versed in the Vedas and the Vedāṅgas. After these rites were ended a sorceress arose, whom the Daityas caused to bring Duryodhana to them in the night . The Dānavas said to him Do not such a rash act as the vow of starvation. The suicide ever sinks into hell, and is blamed...In days of old we had obtained thee by ascetic austerities from Maheśvara the upper part of thy body is wholly made of vajras, and is, therefore, invulnerable to weapons of every description the lower part of thy body was made of flowers by Devī herself ...Brave kṣatriyas, headed by Bhagadatta, will slay thy foes...In order to aid thee many Dānavas have been born on earth. Other Asuras will also possess Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Kṛpa, and others possessed by those Asuras these heroes will aban their kindness and fight with thy foes...We have already settled the means of slaying Arjuna the slain Naraka has assumed the form of Karṇa recollecting his former hostility he will encounter both Keśava and Arjuna, and vanquish Arjuna in battle. Indra in disguise will deprive Karṇa of his earrings and coat of mail. We also have appointed innumerable Daityas and Rākṣasas, the so called Saṃśaptakas, who will slay Arjuna...Thou art ever our refuge, as the Pāṇḍavas are the refuge of the gods. Then the Dānavas embraced and cheered him, and that very goddess carried him back to the spot where he had sat n intent upon putting an end to his life, and there she vanished. Now Duryodhana considered all as a dream, and thought he should defeat the Pāṇḍavas in battle. And also Karṇa, being possessed by the soul of Naraka, and the Saṃśaptakas, possessed by the Rākṣasas, were desirous of slaying Arjuna and Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Kṛpa, etc influenced by the Dānavas, were not so affectionate towards the Pāṇḍavas as they had been. Duryodhana did not tell anyone of this. When the night had passed away Karṇa again exhorted Duryodhana, and promised to slay Arjuna in battle. Duryodhana arose and arranged his army, and went to Hāstinapura, accompanied by Karṇa, Śakuni, his brothers headed by Duḥśāsana and Bhūriśravas, and Somadatta, and Bāhlīka . Karṇadigvijaya . Duryodhanayajña . Hearing the vow of Karṇa, Yudhiṣṭhira, filled with anxiety, made up his mind to aban Dvaitavana. Duryodhana with his brothers, and Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Kṛpa, and Karṇa ruled the earth justly and worshipped the brahmans by sacrifices and profuse gifts .
Ghrāṇaśravas, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Ghṛtācī, an Apsaras, wife of Pramati . aa, . b, . b, .
Ghṛtapāḥ, a class of ṛṣis .
Ghṛtārcis = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ghṛtavatī, a river .
Ghūrṇiā, the maidservant of Devayānī .
Ghuṣya = Śiva .
girayaḥ . u, .
Giriśa1 = Śiva, q.v.
Giriśa2, name of a bow .
Girīśa = Śiva, q.v.
Girigahvara, pl a people .
Girika = Śiva .
Girikā, the wife of Vasu Uparicara .
Girikapriya = Śiva .
Girīṇāṃ śikharāṇi = Śiva .
Girirāj = Himavat, .
Girirāja = Himavat
Giriruha = Śiva .
Girisādhana = Śiva .
Girisutā = Umā, .
Girivarātmajā = Umā, .
Girivraja, the capital of the Māgadhas . b, . Rājagṛha.
Girivrajeśvara = Daṇḍadhāra, .
Girivṛkṣālaya = Śiva .
Gītapriyā, a mātṛ. u, .
Gītavādanakapriya = Śiva .
Gītavāditraśālin = Śiva .
Gītavāditratattvajña = Śiva .
go, pl. . Surabhi go2, v. Gonāman.
Gocara = Śiva .
Gocarmavasana = Śiva .
Gośabdātmaja = Indra, .
Gośṛṅga, a mountain .
Godāvarī, a river .
Godha, pl a people .
godharma .
Goghnata, pl a people .
Gograhaṇa .
Goharaṇaparvan . Meanwhile the spies of Duryodhana returned to Hāstinapura and informed Duryodhana, who was sitting with Droṇa, Karṇa, Kṛpa, Bhīṣma, his brothers, and the Trigartas, that they had not found out the Pāṇḍavas, but that Kīcaka had been slain . Kārṇa and Duḥśāsana proposed that the other spies should be sent . Droṇa said People like the Pāṇḍavas never perish, let the abode which the Pāṇḍavas are to occupy now be settled . Bhīṣma applauded Droṇa . Kṛpa recommended precautions . The Trigarta king, Suśarman, supported by Karṇa, proposed to invade the city of Virāṭa and to rob his kine and wealth, and thus to take revenge for the invasions of the Matsyas headed by Kīcaka. Duryodhana caused Duḥśāsana to array their forces. Suśarman set out towards the south east on the seventh day of the dark fortnight, and the Kauravas on the eighth day . After Kīcaka had been slain, Virāṭa began to rest his hopes on the Pāṇḍavas. His brothers, Śatānīka and Madirākṣa, and the king himself, and Sūryadatta and Śaṅkha, the eldest son of Virāṭa, put on their coats of mail. Virāṭa also caused Śatānīka to order chariots for Kaṅka, Vallava, Tantripāla, and Dāmagranthi . The Matsyas overtook the Trigartas shortly before sunset. Śatānīka and Viśālākṣa penetrated into the heart of the Trigarta host. Virāṭa, with Sūryadatta in his van and Madirākṣa in his rear, began a single combat from chariots against Suśarman . The night interrupted the battle for a while, but it began once more when the moon arose. Suśarman and his younger brother made Virāṭa prisoner, and the Matsyas began to fly Bhīma would uproot a tree, but was prevented by Yudhiṣṭhira, lest the people should recognize them then Bhīma, with Nakula and Sahadeva as protectors of his wheels, rushed against Suśarman, and the Matsya warriors, Virāṭas son, and Yudhiṣṭhira, etc followed him the charioteer of Suśarman was dragged to the ground. Madirāśva came to the aid of Bhīma. Virāṭa leapt n from the chariot of Suśarman, seizing the mace of the latter, and ran in pursuit of him Suśarman was seized by Bhīma, but set free by Yudhiṣṭhira . The Pāṇḍavas passed the night on the field of battle honoured by Virāṭa. As proposed by Yudhiṣṭhira, Virāṭa ordered messengers to proclaim the victory in the city. The messengers repaired to the city that very night, and at sunrise they proclaimed the victory at the city gates . Meanwhile Duryodhana, etc invaded the Matsya country and took away the kine. Hearing this, Bhūmiñjaya, who had been left by the king in the empty city, and whose charioteer had been slain in a great battle, followed the advice of Kṛṣṇa and sent Uttarā, who prevailed upon Bṛhannalā to become the charioteer of Uttara. Uttarā and her maidens asked Arjuna to bring fine clothes for their ls when he had vanquished the Kurus . Seeing the host of the Kurus, Uttara became agitated with fear and jumped n from the chariot and began to flee, but was seized by Arjuna and made to hold the reins, while Arjuna had to fight . Bhīṣma, Droṇa, etc suspected the comer to be Arjuna, and many portents were explained by Droṇa in that sense. Karṇa blamed Droṇa, and Duryodhana said that if it were Arjuna the Pāṇḍavas must go into exile for twelve more years . Having reached the śamī tree, Arjuna ordered Uttara to fetch the weapons of the Pāṇḍavas, including Gāṇḍīva, which were deposited there . Believing that a corpse had been tied up in the tree, Uttara refused, but as Arjuna said There are only bows in that tree and no corpse, he climbed up and unwrapped and untied the bows . Arjuna explained to him to whom the different bows belonged, first mentioning the Gāṇḍīva, which is honoured by the gods, the Dānavas, and the Gandharvas . He then revealed to Uttara that they were the Pāṇḍavas and confirmed it by telling his ten names . Arjuna took off the bracelets from his arms, etc recalled to his mind all his weapons, and twanged the Gāṇḍīva with a dreadful sound, whence the Kurus knew that he was Arjuna, then he comforted Uttara by mentioning his former exploits and his preceptors in arms . Having taken n the banner with the figure of a lion he set up his own flagstaff bearing the figure of an ape with a lions tail, which was a celestial illusion contrived by Viśva karman himself, for as soon as he thought of the gift of Agni, Agni ordered the superhuman creatures to take their usual place on that banner, which then fell n from the air on his chariot . Droṇa concluded from various omens that it was Arjuna . Duryodhana repeated to Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and Kṛpa, his and Karṇas opinion, that Arjuna must have broken his pledge, and asked Bhīṣma to calculate the time. Karṇa blamed Droṇa for praising Arjuna, and declared that he would throw Arjuna n from his chariot that very day . Kṛpa blamed Karṇa and warned him from fighting alone with Arjuna, mentioning his exploits they ought all to fight with Arjuna and not Karṇa alone . Aśvatthāman blamed Karṇa for his vain boast and declared that he would not fight with Arjuna . Bhīṣma tried to mediate between Aśvatthāman and Kṛpa on one side and Karṇa on the other side he was of opinion that fight they must, and therefore this was not the time for quarrel. The Brāhmāstra and the Vedas are never to be seen combined anywhere else than in Droṇa . He was supported by Aśvatthāman and Duryodhana. Droṇa said Let such arrangements be made that Arjuna may not be able to approach Duryodhana in battle, and that Duryodhana may not be captured by the foe . Having calculated the time, Bhīṣma declared that the Pāṇḍavas had not broken the pledge. Duryodhana said will not give back the king to the Pāṇḍavas. Bhīṣma proposed that Duryodhana should proceed towards the capital with one fourth of the army, and that one fourth should escort the kine, while he, Droṇa, Karṇa, Aśvatthāman, and Kṛpa should withstand the foes. This proposal was accepted Bhīṣma placed Droṇa in the centre, Aśvatthāman on the left wing, Kṛpa on the right wing, and Karṇa in the van, and would himself stand in the rear . Droṇa recognized the top of Arjunas banner, etc. Arjuna directed Uttara to the spot where Duryodhana was the soldiers became so con founded that they could not even fly, and the kine turned back along the southern road . As Arjuna was advancing towards Duryodhana the Kurus fell upon him, especially Karṇa, who was supported by Citrasena, Saṅgrā majit, Śatrusaha, Jaya, and Vikarṇa Vikarṇa fled Śatruntapa and many others were slain by Arjuna, so also Saṅgrāmajit at last Karṇa took to flight . Duryodhana, etc attacked Arjuna Arjuna shot at Droṇa, Duḥsaha, Aśvatthāman, Duḥśāsana, and Kṛpa, and wounded Bhīṣma, Duryodhana, and Karṇa. Then Arjuna described to Uttara the banners, etc of Kṛpa, Droṇa, Aśvatthāman, Duryodhana, Karṇa, and Bhīṣma . Indra, the gods, the Viśvas, the Aśvins, the Maruts, the Yakṣas, the Gandharvas, the Mahoragas, the Nāgas, the Rākṣasas, the serpents, the Pitṛs, and the maharṣis came to see the combat, likewise, sitting on the chariot of Indra, king Vasumanas, etc. also Agni, Śiva, Soma, Varuṇa, Prajāpati, Dhātṛ, Vidhātṛ, Kubera, Yama, Alambuṣa, Ugrasena, Tumburu, etc came there . Arjuna attacked Kṛpa, announced his name, and blew the Devadatta at last Kṛpa was led away by his soldiers . Droṇa attacked Arjuna Arjuna said will not strike thee unless thou strikest me first with his own weapons Arjuna baffled the Aindra, Vāyavya, and Āgneya weapons, which were shot by Droṇa a voice was heard in the sky applauding Droṇa then Aśvatthāman attacked Arjuna, which gave Droṇa an opportunity to leave the field . Aśvatthāman cut off the string of the Gāṇḍīva and was applauded by the gods, and by Droṇa, Bhīṣma, Karṇa, and Kṛpa. Arjuna attached a fresh string to the Gāṇḍīva. As Aśvatthāmans arrows became exhausted Karṇa attacked Arjuna, who challenged him to a single combat and rebuked him, because he had fled after the slaughter of his younger brother. At last Karṇa, wounded, fled in a northern direction . Then Arjuna ordered Uttara to take him to Bhīṣma Uttara became afraid and was comforted by Arjuna, who enumerated some of his exploits and weapons. Duḥśāsana, Vikarṇa, Duḥsaha, and Viviṃśati rushed towards Arjuna Duḥśāsana fled Vikarṇa fell n Duḥsaha and Viviṃśati were taken away by their warriors . At last the Kauravas fled Duryodhana, Karṇa, and Duḥśāsana attempted in vain to defeat Arjuna . Then Bhīṣma and Arjuna fought with the Prājāpatya, Aindra, Āgneya, Raudra, Kaubera, Vāruṇa, Yāmya, and Vāyavya weapons the Gandharva Citrasena showed the two combatants to Indra, who showered celestial flowers n upon them at last Bhīṣma, wounded, lost consciousness and was led away by his charioteer . Duryodhana and then Vikarṇa attacked Arjuna Vikarṇa ran back and ascended the chariot of Viviṃśati Duryodhana was wounded and fled, and so did all the warriors . Stung by the censure of Arjuna, Duryodhana returned, and Karṇa, Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Kṛpa, Viviṃśati, and Duḥśāsana rushed forwards to protect Duryodhana. Arjuna employed the weapon Sammohana which he had obtained from Indra, and blew his conch so that the Kurus were deprived of their senses. Then he caused Uttara to take away the white garments of Droṇa and Kṛpa, the yellow ones of Karṇa, and the blue ones of Duryodhana and Aśvatthāman, but not those of Bhīṣma, because he had not been stupefied. Arjuna wounded Bhīṣma, who told Duryodhana to go back to his city, which they all did Arjuna followed them for a while and worshipped Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Aśvatthāman, and Kṛpa then he, with an arrow, broke the crown of Duryodhana and blew the Devadatta. Then he ordered Uttara to turn back. The gods returned to their respective abodes . A large number of Kuru soldiers issuing from the forest stood before Arjuna with joined palms and were spared. Arjuna said to Uttara Do not eulogize the Pāṇḍavas, but say that the feat is thy own. Then he replaced the weapons on the śamī tree the monkey ascended to the sky, together with the other creatures on the flagstaff, the illusion melted away, and Uttaras own banner was replaced upon the chariot. Arjuna entered the city in the guise of Bṛhannalā, having sent the cowherds to announce the victory . Virāṭa entered his city, followed by the four Pāṇḍavas, and dispatched an army to protect Uttara, though Yudhiṣṭhira said that, protected by Bṛhannalā, he was able to vanquish even the gods, the Asuras, the Siddhas, and the Yakṣas. Meanwhile the messengers of Uttara came and Virāṭa ordered the highways to be decorated, etc and began to play at dice with Yudhiṣṭhira, who again repeatedly praised Bṛhannalā. Virāṭa struck Yudhiṣṭhira with a die, but the blood was prevented from falling on the ground and was washed away by Kṛṣṇā, who also, at the injunction of Yudhiṣṭhira, let Uttara enter alone, that Bṛhannalā should not see him bleeding. Uttara prevailed upon Virāṭa to ask Yudhiṣṭhiras par. When the bleeding had stopped, Bṛhannalā entered . Uttara said All this has been accomplished by a devaputra who then disappeared. Arjuna gave to Uttarā the garments he had brought .
Gohita = Viṣṇu .
Gokarṇa1, name of a tīrtha belonging to Śiva .
Gokarṇa2 = Śiva .
Gokarṇā, a mātṛ. u, .
Gokarṇāsanamardana = Arjuna, .
Gokula, name of a place .
golāṅgūla, pl a kind of monkey .
Goloka . b, . Gautama said Next blaze eternal reent regions, free from passion and sorrow, the world of kine, difficult to attain. Dhṛtarāṣṭra said He who possessing, kine gives away every year, etc the brahmans who grow old practising brahmacarya, who obey the declarations of the Vedas, and, endued with intelligence, betake themselves to tīrthayātrās, dwell here in felicity likewise those who repair to Prabhāsa, etc .
Gomahiṣadā, a mātṛ. u, .
Gomanda, v. Gomanta2.
Gomanta1, a mountain .
Gomanta2, a mountain on Krauñcadvīpa .
Gomanta, pl a people .
Gomārga = Śiva .
Gomatī, a river. b, . b, . b, . m, . b, .
Gomukha1, a king .
Gomukha2, the son of Mātali .
Gonāman .
Gonanda, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Gonarda = Śiva .
Gopa, pl. = Nārāyaṇa, pl .
Gopāla, pl. = Nārāyaṇa, pl .
Gopāla = Kṛṣṇa, .
Gopālakakṣa, a country .
Gopālakakṣa, pl a people .
Gopāli = Śiva .
Gopālī, an Apsaras .
Gopālī, a mātṛ. u, .
Goparāṣṭra, pl a people .
Gopati1, a Gandharva .
Gopati2 = Sūrya, .
Gopati3, a prince. b, .
Gopati4 = Varuṇa, .
Gopati5, a son of Śibi. b, .
Gopati6 = Śiva .
Gopati7 = Viṣṇu .
Gopendra = Kṛṣṇa, .
Gopījanapriya = Kṛṣṇa, .
Gopratāra1, a tīrtha on the Sarayū .
Gopratāra2 = Śiva .
Goptṛ = Śiva, .
Goptṛ = Viṣṇu .
Goptrātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Goputra = Karṇa, .
Gorāśva, v. Gaurāśva.
Goratha, a mountain near Girivraja .
Goṣṭha = Śiva, .
Gostanī, a mātṛ. u, .
Gotama, a ṛṣi . b, . Dīrghatamas.
Govardhana1, a mountain .
Govardhana2, name of a banyan tree in the country of the Bāhīkas .
Govāsa, pl. = Govāsana, pl .
Govāsana = Śaibya2, .
Govāsana, pl. .
Govidāṃ pati = Viṣṇu .
Govinda1 = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Govinda2, a mountain in Krauñcadvīpa .
Govinda3 = Śiva .
Govitata, a kind of horse sacrifice, .
Govraja, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Govṛṣa = Śiva .
Govṛṣabhāṅka, Govṛṣadhvaja = Śiva, q.v.
Govṛṣeśvara = Śiva, .
Govṛṣeśvaravāhana = Śiva .
Govṛṣottamavāhana = Śiva, q.v.
graha1, mostly pl. . of special planets Budha, . Śanaiścara, . Śukra, . Śveta, . Rāhu, .
graha2 sg. and pl b .
graha3, pl. = Śiva .
Grahagaṇeśvara = Soma, .
Grahapati1 = Soma, .
Grahapati2 = Śiva .
Grāma = Śiva .
Grāmaṇī = Viṣṇu .
Grāmaṇī, a follower of Śiva .
Grāmaṇīya, pl. .
Granthika = Dāmagranthi .
gṛdhra, pl. .
. b Bhīṣma related The young child of a brahman died and was taken to the burning place a vulture caused the lamenting kinsmen to leave the child, as the sun was soon to set, saying that the child could not be revived by their lingering. A jackal, black as a raven, rebuked them for not waiting till the sun had set, as the child might possibly revive. The vulture and the jackal alternately endeavoured to persuade them. The jackal mentioned that by Rāmas slaying the Śūdra named Śambuka, a brahmaṇa child was restored to life similarly the son of R. ṛ. Śveta. The vulture said that if only Rudra, etc would grant him a boon, the child might come back to life, and mentioned the spirits and Y. and Rā etc who haunt the burning place, while the jackal reminded them that it was here on this quiet and peaceful spot that the Pitṛs by thousands took leave of the world. The jackal and the vulture continued to dispute, exhausted with hunger and thirst, wishing to get opportunity of devouring the child. Then Śaṅkara exhorted by his consort came, and, taking up a quantity of water in his hands, restored the child to life for a hundred years, and to the jackal and the vulture he granted a boon, in consequence of which their hunger was appeased. Blessing upon the reader .
Gṛdhrakūṭa, a mountain. b, .
Gṛdhrapatra, a warrior of Skanda. u
Gṛdhravaṭa, a tīrtha .
Gṛhadevī .
Gṛhānāṃ pravibhāga .
Gṛhapati = Agni, q.v.
gṛhayajña, .
Gṛtsamada, a ṛṣi . b, .
Gudākeśa = Arjuna, q.v.
Gūḍhavrata = Śiva .
Guha1 = Skanda, q.v.
Guha2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Guha3 = Śiva .
Guha4 = Viṣṇu .
Guha, pl a people .
Guhāpālapraveśināṃ = Śiva .
Guhāvāsin = Śiva .
Guhya1 = Śiva .
Guhya2 = Viṣṇu
Guhya3 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Guhya, pl. = Guhyaka, pl .
Guhyaka, pl a class of beings, followers of Kubera . bis, . b, . b, . b, . c, . Guhya, pl.
Guhyaka, sg .
Guhyaka, name of a Yakṣa .
Guhyakādhipa = Kubera, .
Guhyakādhipati = Kubera, .
Guhyakāstra .
Guhyatapas = Śiva .
Guṇabhṛt = Viṣṇu .
Guṇabuddhi, Guṇādhika, Guṇākara = Śiva .
Guṇakeśī, the daughter of Mātalī .
Guṇamukhyā, an Apsaras .
Guṇātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Guṇauṣada = Śiva .
Guṇāvarā, an Apsaras .
Gupta = Viṣṇu .
Guptaka, one of the standard bearers of Jayadratha .
Guru1 = Bṛhaspati, .
Guru2 = Droṇa, . Ācārya.
Guru3 = Śiva, .
Guru4 = Viṣṇu .
Gurubhāra, a Suparṇa, the son of Garuḍa .
Guruśaktidhārin = Skanda, .
. g Kṛṣṇa said Asked by his disciple Whence am whence art thou etc the preceptor said This was declared by Brahmán himself to Ṛ. it was known to the conclaves of Si. in the ancient kalpas. In days of old Ṛ. Bṛhaspati, etc. assembled together for asking one another, tired with their acts placing Ṛ. Āṅgirasa at their head, they beheld, in the abode of Brahmán, Brahmán free from sin, and were instructed by him about how a good man should act, about Emancipation, etc. Truth is the universe of being, light, ether, sun, wind, Indra and Prajāpati are not seen as long as one has not attained to Adhyātma religion has faith for its indication the number of elements are twenty four and one more . Brahmán discoursed on the city of nine gates, the three qualities, etc the qualities belonging to darkness Ṛ Mu and . become deluded, desirous of pleasure . Brahmán discoursed on passion and sattva the qualities are not completely separated from one another, etc. from the unmanifest first sprang the great soul, the source of all intelligence, the source of all qualities, called Mahān ātmā, Viṣṇu, Jiṣṇu, Śambhu, Buddhi, etc pervading everything in the universe, stationed in the heart of all, endued with minuteness, lightness, and affluence this is said to be the first creation the great, who was first produced and called Ahaṅkāra, is the second creation, the source of all creatures, a god, the creator of gods, etc. from Ahaṅkārā was born the five great elements the prāṇas, etc. the eleven organs sprung from Ahaṅkāra ENTITY . ON THE SELF . AMONG OBJECTS . AMONG GODS . . ether . ear ... sound ... the Quarters . . wind . skin ... objects of touch ... Lightning . . light . eye ... form and colour ... the Sun . . water . tongue ... taste ... Soma. . earth . nose ... scent ... the Wind . . feet ... motion ... Viṣṇu. . Apāna... anus ... excreta ... Mitra. . organ of generation ... vital seed ... Prajāpati. . hands ... actions ... Śakra . . speech ... what is spoken ... Vahni . . mind ... mental operation ... the Moon . . egoism . consciousness of self ... Rudra. . understanding what is to be understood ... Brahmán. Three are the seats of all existent objects land, water, and ether the mode of birth is fourfold etc. on the means of attaining to Brahmán on the body the emancipated one is Viṣṇu, etc. him praise brahmans, As Y Pś P birds, Rā Bh and M. ṛ. the kṣatriya, elephant, lion, sheep, snake, bull, and male are of middle quality the nyagrodha, etc. are the foremost among trees Himavat, etc. are the foremost among mountains M. are the foremost of the gaṇas, etc. the day was first, then arose the night, etc. the months are said to begin with the bright fortnights the constellations begin with Śravaṇa the seasons with winter, etc. on the wheel of life on the duties that men should observe on renunciation, knowledge, and power on the different conceptions of Bráhman it is impossible to attain to Puruṣa by any other means than goodness some assert the unity of Kṣetrajña and sattva this is not correct the relation of Puruṣa to sattva is like that of the gnat to the udumbara, or that of water drops on the leaf of a lotus. The Ṛ. once more asked about the diversities of practice observed by men, and about the connection between the Kṣetrajña and sattva . Brahmán, quoting what was said by a preceptor to a disciple, said that abstention from harming any creature is the foremost of all duties, and the relation between sattva and Kṣetrajña is that of the object to the subject, or like that of the matter to the maker, or like that of a lamp to him who lights it sattva is manifest, while Puruṣa is unmanifest knowledge is indispensable for attaining to felicity from pradhāna develops mahat, from mahat ahaṅkāra, from ahaṅkāra the five elements the qualities of the elements are the following ELEMENTS. QUALITIES. ether sound. wind touch sound. light rūpa touch sound. water taste rūpa touch sound. earth smell taste rūpa touch sound. . agreeable . white . rough . Ṣadja. . disagreeable . dark . cold . Ṛṣabha. . sweet . sweet . red . hot . Gāndhāra. . sour . sour . blue . tender . Madhyama. . pungent . pungent . yellow . hard . Pañcama. . diffusive . bitter . grey . smooth . Niṣāda. . compact . astringent . short . slippery . Dhaivata. . oily . saline . long . oily . agreeable. . dry . minute . painful . disagreeable. . clear . gross . clear . compact. . square . soft . circular . Space is the highest of the elements ahaṅkāra buddhi ātman the unmanifest avyaktaṃ Puruṣa . Brahmán said The body is called the carriage of Bráhman, on which the individual soul drives about the senses are the steeds the mind is the charioteer, called also the bhūtātman, because it is the ruler of the elements the reins are the buddhi, called also kṣetrajña, because it proclaims power. The order of the dissolution is, the creatures, their qualities, the elements men, G Pś As and Rā. have all sprung from Nature, and not from actions, nor from a cause the brahmans, who are creators of the universe are born here again and again all that springs from them is dissolved in those very five great elements like billows in the ocean those elements that compose the universe are the five great elements, and higher than these is the way of the emancipated Prajāpati created all this by the mind alone in the same manner Ṛ. attained to . by the aid of penance different degrees of bliss after death, according as one performs acts with expectation, being full of egoism, or is devoid of selfiṣness, and freed from egoism through yoga freed from darkness and passion and adhering only to goodness, one becomes released from every sin and creates all things such a one should be known to be kṣetrajña he who knows him knows the Veda that which begins with the unmanifest and ends with the gross qualities, has ignorance for its indication selfishness is death, the reverse is the eternal the high minded ancients never applaud action by action a creature is born with body the indication of tranquillity is like what takes place in a dream this is the goal of the emancipated ones who are intent on knowledge. The preceptor said Thus addressed by Brahmán, Mu. acted accordingly and attained to felicity . Kṛṣṇa said The pupil acted accordingly and then attained to emancipation .
Guruputra1, .
Guruputra2 = Śuka, .
Guruskandha, a mountain. g, .
Gurutama = Viṣṇu .
Hāhā, a Gandharva always mentioned to gether with Hūhū . b, .
Haiḍambi, v. Haiḍimbi.
Haiḍimba1, adj. .
Haiḍimba2 = Ghaṭotkaca, q.v.
Haiḍimbasūnu = Añjanaparvan, .
Haiḍimbi = Ghaṭotkaca, q.v.
Haihaya, pl a people . b It is heard that the brahmans, raising a standard of kuśa grass, encountered the kṣatriyas of the Haihaya clan in battle the vaiśyas and the śūdras joined the brahmans. In the battles, however, the three castes repeatedly broke n, while the kṣatriyas, though alone, vanquished their large army because they obeyed the commands of only one person, while the other three castes acted each according to his individual understanding. The brahmans then appointed one among themselves as their commander, and thus succeeded in vanquishing the kṣatriyas, . b, . b, .
Haihaya1, a son of Vatsa. b, . Vītahavya.
Haihaya2 = Arjuna Kārtavīrya, .
Haihaya3 = Sumitra, .
Haihayaśreṣṭha = Arjuna Kārtavīrya, .
Haihayādhipati = Arjuna Kārtavīrya, .
Haihayarṣabha = Arjuna Kārtavīrya, .
Haihayeśapramāthin = Rāma Jāmadagnya, .
Haihayendra = Arjuna Kārta vīrya, .
Haima1, a mountain. b, .
Haima2 = Śiva .
Haimavata1 .
Haimavata2, adj. . i, . u, .
Haimavata, pl. . Haimavatika, pl.
Haimavatī = Gaṅgā, .
Haimavatī, the wife of Kauśika .
Haimavatī, one of the wives of Kṛṣṇa .
Haimavatika, pl. . Haimavata, pl.
Hairaṇvatī, a river .
Hairaṇyagarbha = Vasiṣṭha, .
Hairaṇyaka, name of a varṣa .
Halabhṛt = Balarāma, .
Haladhara = Balarāma, .
Haladharānuja = Kṛṣṇa, .
Halāyudha1 = Balarāma, .
Halāyudha2 = Viṣṇu .
Halika, a serpent .
Halimā, a mātṛ .
Halīmaka, a serpent .
Halin = Balarāma, .
Haṃsa1
Haṃsa2, a Gandharva king, the son of Ariṣṭā .
Haṃsa3, follower of Jarāsandha .
Haṃsa4 = Sūrya, .
haṃsa, pl. .
Haṃsacūḍa, a Yakṣa .
Haṃsaja, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Haṃsakākīyaākhyāna .
. There lived on the other side of the ocean a rich vaiśya with many children, kind to all creatures. A crow lived upon the refuse of the dishes set before these children. The crow, becoming arrogant, came to disregard all birds. Once, certain swans, having their abodes in the Mānasa lake, came to that side of the ocean. The crow challenged their leader, saying that he would display different kinds of motion, ng every yojanas in a separate kind of motion rising up and swooping n, etc. One of the swans said that they knew but that one kind of motion that all birds know, at which the assembled crows laughed aloud. The swans in vain tried to dissuade the crow. They began to fly. Beholding the diverse kinds of flight of the crow, the crows loudly rejoiced, while the swans laughed in mockery. For a moment the swan, with that one kind of slow motion, seemed to yield to the crow. As the swan flew westwards to the ocean, the crow was anxious and became almost senseless at not seeing any islands or trees whereon to perch when tired. At last the swan asked What is this kind of flight that thou hast now ated thou touchest the waters with thy wings and beak repeatedly. The crow suddenly fell n, and imploring the swan, prevailed upon him to take him on his back and carry him to the shore, and promised never to disregard others.
Haṃsakāyana, pl a people .
Haṃsakūṭa, a mountain .
Haṃsamārga, pl a people . Haṃsapatha.
Haṃsapada, v. Haṃsapatha.
Haṃsapatha, pl a people . Haṃsamārga.
Haṃsaprapatana, a tīrtha .
Haṃsātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Haṃsavaktra, a warrior of Skanda. u
Haṃsī, a daughter of Bhagīratha .
Haṃsikā, a celestial cow, daughter of Surabhi .
Hanūmad Bhīma saṃvāda . Hanūmat said that he was the son of Vāyu with the wife of Keśarin, and the friend of the Suns son Sugrīva, who, together with Śakras son Vālin, used to be waited upon by all monkeys further, that Sugrīva had been driven out by his brother, and dwelt for a long time with Hanūmat at Ṛṣyamūka, when Rāma Dāśarathi, who was Viṣṇu in human shape, with his wife and younger brother resided in the Daṇḍaka forest, and the Rākṣasa Rāvaṇa carried away Sītā, Rāmas queen, from Janasthāna, assisted by the Rākṣasa Mārīca, in the form of a deer marked with gems and gold . Rāma slew Vālin and installed Sugrīva in the king Sugrīva sent monkeys to inquire after Sītā, and according to the communi cations of the vulture Sampāti, Hanūmat crossed the ocean, extending over yojanas, saw Sītā in the abode of Rāvaṇa, burnt Laṅkā, and returned to Rāma. Rāma constructed a bridge across the deep, and, followed by myriads of monkeys, he slew Rāvaṇa, his brother, sons, and kindred, together with all the Rākṣasas, and installed the pious Rākṣasa chief Vibhīṣaṇa in the king in Laṅkā, and then returned with Sītā to his city Ayodhyā, and was established in the king. Rāma granted to Hanūmat that he should live as long as the history of Rāmas deeds is remembered on earth. Rāma went to his own abode after having reigned, years. From that time all excellent objects of entertainment were, through the grace of Sītā, supplied to Hanūmat, who constantly stayed there hearing the deeds of Rāma sung by Apsarases and Gandharvas . He had obstructed this path of the gods to Bhīma with the view that none might defeat or curse him . When Bhīma asked Hanūmat to show him the form he had when crossing the ocean, Hanūmat declared this to be impossible, as all things diminish according to the different yugas, even the Siddhas, gods, and great ṛṣis. Then he described the Kṛta yuga and the Tretā, Dvāpara, and Kaliyuga . Hanūmat was prevailed upon to grant the request of Bhīma, and showed himself as great as the Vindhya or the Maināka mountain, and said that he might become as long as he wished he had himself been able to slay Rāvaṇa, but would not obscure the glory of Rāma. He pointed out to Bhīma the way to the Saugandhika vana and the garden of Kubera, which was guarded by Yakṣas and Rākṣasas, and warned him against plucking the flowers himself, delivering a discourse upon the duties of the four castes, etc. .
Hanumat or Hanūmat, name of a monkey, the son of Vāyu . h, . also the following synonyms Anilātmaja, . Mārutātmaja, . Pavanātmaja, . Vāyuputra, . Vāyutanaya, .
Hanūmatpratyāgamana . Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa were dwelling on the mountain Mālyavat. Rāma sent Lakṣmaṇa to Kiṣkindhyā to threaten Sugrīva. Sugrīva, however, said that he had despatched monkeys in all directions to find out Sītā. After a month those who had been sent to the north, the east, and the west returned. After two months Hanūmat, Aṅgada, etc returned from the south, after having pillaged Madhuvaṇa . Hanūmat told that in a cavern of the palace of Maya the ascetic Prabhāvatī had shown them the way on the shore they had seen the mountains Sahya, Malaya, and Dardura, then they had met Sampāti, the brother of Jaṭāyu, and had informed him of everything Sampāti then had directed them to Laṅkā, whereafter Hanūmat had crossed the ocean and slain the Rākṣasī of the water, and had been recognized by Sītā from the words of Avindhya Sītā had given him a jewel as a credential and told him, as a token, that Rāma on the mountain Citrakūṭa had shot a blade of grass at a crow Hanūmat then had caused himself to be seized by the soldiers of Rāvaṇa, and set fire to Laṅkā.
Hanyamāna, pl a people, .
Hara1, an Asura .
Hara2, Śiva, q.v.
Hara3, a Rudra .
Harāhara, an Asura .
Hārahūṇa, pl a people . Hūṇa, pl.
Haraṇāharaṇa .
. Kṛṣṇa said that Arjuna had not insulted their family, but had rather enhanced their respect, and prevailed upon them that they, by conciliation, brought Arjuna back to Dvārakā, where he was united in marriage with Subhadrā and passed a whole year. The last time of his exile he passed in Puṣkara. After the twelve years were complete he came back to Khāṇḍavaprastha. Draupadī at first was jealous, but then embraced Subhadrā. Kṛṣṇa visited them at Indraprastha with Rāma, Akrūra Dānapati, Anādhṛṣṭi, Uddhava, Satyaka and Sātyaki, and Kṛtavarman Sātvata, and Pradyumna, Śāmba, Niśaṭha, Śaṅku, Cārudeṣṇa, Jhillin, Vipṛthu, Sāraṇa, Gada, etc bringing with them many nuptial presents. Yudhiṣṭhira sent the twins out to receive them. Kṛṣṇa gave them, kine from the country of Mathurā, and Bālhika horses as kanyādhana, etc. Rāma gave Arjuna as a wedding present, elephants. Having spent many days in sports and merriment there, the Vṛṣṇis returned to Dvāravatī with Rāma in the van, carrying with them the gems that had been given them by Yudhiṣṭhira. But Kṛṣṇa remained with Arjuna at Indrapraṣtha, and they went a hunting over the borders of the Yamunā. Subhadrā brought forth Abhimanyu, so called because he was fearless and wrathful . Upon his birth Yudhiṣṭhira gave away, kine and niṣkas to the brahmans. The child became the favourite of Vāsudeva, etc and acquired from his father the Dhanurveda . Pāñcalī also obtained five sons Prativindhya, Sutasoma, Śrutakarman, Śatānīka, Śrutasena. They were born each at the interval of one year. Their jātakarman, cūḍa, and upanayana were performed by Dhaumya. After having studied the Vedas they acquired from Arjuna knowledge of all weapons celestial and human .
Haraṇāhārika .
Harasulocana = Śiva .
Hārdikya1 = Kṛtavarman, q.v.
Hārdikya2, a prince .
Hārdikyatanaya .
Hari1 = Viṣṇu, q.v.
Hari2, a Rākṣasa .
Hari3, a Suparṇa, the son of Garuḍa .
Hari4, the son of Akampana . b, .
Hari5, an Asura, the son of Tārakākṣa .
Hari6, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Hari7, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Hari8 = Indra, .
Hari9 = Śiva .
hari, pl the horses of Indra, .
Harī, a daughter of Krodhavaśā .
Haribabhru, a muni .
Hariścandra, an ancient king . b H. is the only king who lives in the palace of Indra, and the reason is that H. had formerly brought the whole earth with its seven islands under his sway, and had performed the rājasūya sacrifice, to which all the kings of the earth brought wealth at his command, and having concluded the rājasūya, he was installed in the sovereignty of the earth . All princes who perform a rājasūya or are slain in battle without turning their backs, or yield up their lives after severe ascetic penances, attain to the region of Indra, .
Hariśmaśru1, a ṛṣi .
Hariśmaśru2 = Indra, .
Hariśmaśru3 = Śiva .
Hariśrāvā, a river .
Haridraka, a serpent .
Harigiri, a mountain on Kuśadvīpa .
Harihaya1 = Indra, q.v.
Harihaya2 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Harijaṭa = Śiva, .
Harikeśa1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Harikeśa2 = Śiva, .
Harimat1, a rite .
Harimat2 = Indra, .
Harimedha = Mahāpuruṣa .
Harimedhas, an ancient king .
Harimedhas2 = Viṣṇu, .
Hariṇa1, a serpent .
Hariṇa2, name of an ichneumon, v. Harita.
Hariṇa3 = Śiva .
Hariṇāśva, a prince .
Hariṇākṣa = Śiva .
harīndra, .
Harinetra = Śiva, .
Haripiṇḍā, a mātṛ. u, .
Harirudra .
Harita1, name of an ichneumon. b, .
Harita2 = Śiva .
Hārita, a muni . Hārīta.
Hārīta, a muni .
Harivāhana = Indra, q.v.
Harivaṃśa, the appendix of Mhbhr . c, .
Harivarṣa, name of a varṣa .
Harivāsa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Harṣa, a son of Dharma .
Haryaśva1, king of Ayodhyā .
Haryaśva2, king of the Kāśis, father of Sudeva and grand father of Divodāsa. b, .
Haryaśva3 = Śiva .
Haryakṣa = Śiva, .
Haryakṣan = Śiva, .
Hasana, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Hasinī, an Apsaras. b, .
Hasta, a nakṣatra . Sāvitra.
Hastibhadra, a serpent .
Hastīśvara = Śiva .
Hastikāśyapa, a ṛṣi .
. b Bhīṣma said A brahman Gautama nursed an infant elephant that had lost its mother, till it was ten years old, huge as a hill, etc. he looked upon it as a son, and it brought him his fuel and water. Indra, in the shape of king Dhṛtarāṣṭra, seized this young elephant, offering to give to Gautama great riches instead what use can brahmans have of elephants . Gautama said he would take the elephant from him even in, Mandākinī, the woods of Meru, Nandana, Uttarāḥ Kuravaḥ, Prājā patyāḥ lokāḥ, Svayambhubhavana, the world of the Somapīthin Dhṛtarāṣṭra, as regards c k, said that he would go to higher regions, and as regards l n, that he would not go there having mentioned, Gautama recognized Indra they asked each others benediction Indra returned the elephant, and as Gautama alone of all Ṛ. had been able to recognize him, he took Gautama and the elephant with him and proceeded to heaven .
Hastin1, a son of the elder Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Hastin2, a son of Suhotra .
Hāstinapura, the capital of the Kurus, on the river Gaṅgā . Gajāhvaya, Gajapura, Gajasāhvaya, Nāgāhvaya, Nāga pura, Nāgasāhvaya, Vāraṇāhvaya, Vāraṇasāhvaya.
Hastipāda, a serpent .
Hastipiṇḍa, a serpent .
Hastisomā, a river .
Hāṭaka, a country .
Hāṭaka, pl the inhabitants of Hāṭaka .
Havana, a Rudra .
Havidhra, an ancient king .
Haviḥśravas, a son of the elder Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Havirdhāman. b, .
Havis1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Haviṣmat, a ṛṣi .
Haviṣmatī, a daughter of Aṅgiras .
Havyakavyabhuj1 = Viṣṇu, .
Havyakavyabhuj2 = Agni, q.v.
Havyavah, Havyavāha, Havyavāhana = Agni, q.v.
Haya, pl a family .
hayaśāstra, .
Hayaśiras, a form of Viṣṇu . b, . Aśvaśiras, Hayamukha, Vaḍavāmukha.
Hayaśiras2 = Mahāpuruṣa
Hayaśirodhara = Viṣṇu, . Hayaśiras1.
Hayagardhabhi = Śiva .
Hayagrīva1, a Videha king .
Hayagrīva2, an Asura .
Hayagrīva3, an ancient king. b The ancient king H after having slain a large number of his foes in battle, was himself defeated and slain, being once without a follower at his side. He acquired great fame from the battles he fought. This was his sacrifice, and having com pleted it by yielding up his life breaths, he is now sporting in the regions of the gods. He protected his king, performed sacrifices, was possessed of learning, etc. He drank soma in the sacrifices, gratified the brahmans, etc therefore he won heaven, .
Hayamukha = Viṣṇu, .
Hayarāja . Hāyi hāyi huvā hoyi huvā hoyi tathā sakṛd gāyanti tvāṃ sāmagā brahmavādinaḥ = Śiva .
Hemā, a river .
Hemaśṛṅga, a mountain. b, .
Hemaguha, a serpent .
Hemakampana, a Kuru warrior .
Hemakara = Śiva .
Hemakūṭa. b On the mountain H. the utterance of words caused the gathering of clouds and stones by thousands. There the recitation of the sacred scriptures was heard, but nobody was seen in the evening and the morning there was seen fire, and biting flies would interrupt the austerities. Lomaśa explained that formerly on this Ṛṣabhakūṭa dwelt a great and resentful ṛṣi, who was many hundred years old, and was named Ṛshabha. When practising austerities he had been spoken to by others, and in wrath he ordered the mountain to throw stones on him who should utter any word there, and forbade the wind to make any noise. Therefore, as soon as a man utters any word here he is forbidden by a roaring cloud. Formerly, when the gods came to the Nandā, many men came to see them, but the gods with Indra at their head did not like to be seen, and therefore they rendered the spot inaccessible by raising obstructions in the form of mountains, and from that day onwards men could not see that hill, far less ascend it. Lomaśa further said Here all the gods performed the best sacrifices, and the marks thereof may be seen to this the grass resembling kuśa grass, and many trees resembling yūpas the gods and ṛṣis dwell there to this and it is their fire which is seen in the evening and the morning. By bathing here ones sins are destroyed, .
Hemanetra, a Yakṣa .
Hemāṅga = Viṣṇu .
Hemapuñjaka, a Kuru warrior .
Hemavarman = Hiraṇyavarman, .
Hemavarṇa1, a Suparṇa, the son of Garuḍa .
Hemavarṇa2, the son of Rocamāna .
Heramba = Gaṇeśa, .
Herambaka, pl a people .
Hetu = Viṣṇu .
Hetvātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Hiḍimba, a Rākṣasa, slain by Bhīmasena .
Hiḍimbā, a Rākṣasī, sister of Hiḍimba and by Bhīmasena, mother of Ghaṭotkaca .
. Not far from that place dwelt on a śāla tree the Rākṣasa Hiḍimba, a cannibal with eight long and sharp pointed teeth, etc. Scenting the or of man, he sent his sister Hiḍimbā to slaughter them and bring them unto him. She fell in love with Bhīma, and, assuming a beautiful form, she asked him to become her husband, and promised to rescue him and his brothers and mother from her brother but Bhīma refused to awaken them . Seeing that his sister did not return soon enough, Hiḍimba proceeded quickly to the spot, and, abusing his sister, he rushed at her, but was seized by Bhīma and dragged to a distance, lest his yells should awaken the brothers of Bhīma fighting they broke n the trees, etc and at those sounds the Pāṇḍavas woke up with their mother, and saw Hiḍimbā sitting before them . She made herself and her love for Bhīma known to them. Arjuna offered to assist Bhīma but Bhīma refused. Arjuna then said The morning twilight is about to set in during the twilights Rākṣasas become stronger kill him without delay. Then Bhīma threw the Rākṣasa to the ground, and he, dying, sent forth a terrible yell then he bled up his body and broke it in the middle. Arjuna thought there was a town not far off. Thereto they proceeded, followed by Hiḍimbā . Bhīma would also have slain Hiḍimbā, but was prevented by Yudhiṣṭhira. It was agreed upon, that she should have Bhīma for her husband, until she got a son, sporting with him during the but bringing him back every evening. She then flew away with him, and sported with him on mountains, etc until she had brought forth
Hīka, a Piśāca .
Himālaya = Himavat, .
Himavadgirisaṃśraya = Śiva .
Himavat, the Himalaya mountains . b, . d, . . c, . i, . u, . z, . aa, . b, . b, . f, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, gireḥ, father of Umā, whom he bestowed upon ŚivaBhṛgu therefore cursed H that it should have no gems, . g, . b, . z, . b, . b, . b, . b, . f, . g, . c, . also the following synonyms Śailaguru, . Śailarāj, . Śailarāja, . Śailendra, . Girirāj, . Girirāja, . Himālaya, q.v.
Himavatparvatātmajā = Umā
Himavatsuta = Arbuda, .
Hiṇḍuka = Śiva .
Hiraṇmaya1, a ṛṣi .
Hiraṇmaya2, a varṣa. i To the south of Nīla and the north of Niṣadha is the varṣa H. with the River Hairaṇvatī it is the abode of Garuḍa, the people are all followers of the Yakṣas, wealthy, and handsome, of great strength and cheerful, their life lasting for, years. The three summits are beautiful one is made of jewels, another of gold, and the third of all kinds of gems, and aned with palaces there the self luminous goddess Śāṇḍilī always lives, .
Hiraṇmaya3 = Śiva, .
Hiraṇmaya4 Mahāpuruṣa .
Hiraṇvatī, name of a river .
Hiraṇyabāhu1, a serpent .
Hiraṇyabāhu2 = Śiva, .
Hiraṇyabindu, a tīrtha . d By stirring the waters of H. and reverencing the god, who lies in the kuśa grass, one is cleansed of his sins, .
Hiraṇyaśikhara, a mountain . the next.
Hiraṇyaśṛṅga, a mountain . the preceding.
Hiraṇyadhanus, king of the Niṣādas and father of Ekalavya .
Hiraṇyagarbha1 = Brahmán . b, .
Hiraṇyagarbha2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Hiraṇyahasta, a brahman .
Hiraṇyakaśipu, an Asura . c, . d, . b, . f, . b, cursed by Vasiṣṭha and slain Ānuśāsanik.sarvāmaraiśvaryaṃ
Hiraṇyakavaca = Śiva, .
Hiraṇyakavacodbhava = Śiva .
Hiraṇyākhya, v. Hiraṇyākṣa.
Hiraṇyakṛt = Agni, q.v.
Hiraṇyakṛtacūda = Śiva .
Hiraṇyākṣa1, an Asura . b, .
Hiraṇyākṣa2, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Hiraṇyākṣī = Durgā, .
Hiraṇyanābha = Viṣṇu .
Hiraṇyapakṣa śakuni = Kṛṣṇa, .
Hiraṇyapati = Śiva .
Hiraṇyapura, a city of the Asuras . d, . Dānavapura.
Hiraṇyaretas1 = Agni, q.v.
Hiraṇyaretas2 = Śiva .
Hiraṇyaroman = Bhīṣmaka, .
Hiraṇyasaras, a tīrtha. b, tīrthaṃ = Prabhāsa, there Soma bathed
Hiraṇyātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Hiraṇyavarman1, king of the Daśārṇas.
Hiraṇyavarman2 = Śiva, .
Hiraṇyavarṇa = Śiva, .
Hiraṇyavarṇa garbha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Hiraṇyeśaya = Mahāpuruṣa .
Hlādana = Śiva .
Homātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Homya = Śiva .
Hotra = Śiva .
Hotravāhana1, a Brahmarṣi .
Hotravāhana2, a Rājarṣi .
Hotṛ = Śiva
hrada, pl. . u, .
Hrāda, a serpent .
Hradapraveśana .
. The followers of Śakuni attacked the Pāṇḍavas Arjuna and Bhīmasena came to the rescue of Sahadeva Arjuna slew them Duryo dhana rallied the remnants of his chariots, etc and urged them against the Pāṇḍavas and Dhṛṣṭadyumna they were exterminated in a moment by the Pāṇḍavas and the Sṛñjayas. Only Duryodhana remained alive. Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya recounted the numbers of the remnants of the Pāṇḍava army. Duryodhana abaned his slain steeds and fled away on foot without a companion, towards a lake, taking up his mace, recalling the words of Vidura. The Pāṇḍavas with Arjuna baffled the Kurus. In Duryodhanas army no great chariot warrior was alive save Aśvatthāman, etc. . Urged by Dhṛṣṭadyumna, Sātyaki was about to slay Sañjaya but Vyāsa came and caused him to be let off alive. He met with Duryodhana, whom he told the state of things, and who asked him to inform Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Then Duryodhana, having charmed the waters, entered the lake. Sañjaya then met with Aśvatthāman, etc and informed them they fled away, at sight of the Pāṇḍavas, to the Kuru camp, taking Sañjaya up in the chariot of Kṛpa. The sun had set a little before. The outposts of the camp wept aloud. The old men proceeded towards the city with the princesses also the camp guards fled towards the city, and so did also the cowherds, etc from fear of Bhīmasena. Yuyutsu reflected . With the permission of Yudhiṣṭhira he supervised the removal of the ladies. The sun was setting. Having entered Hāstinapura with the ladies, he informed Vidura urged by Vidura, he passed that night in his own abode, while Vidura went to the cheerless mansion of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related The Pāṇḍavas wandered over the field in search of Duryodhana tired, they took rest in their camp with all their soldiers. Then Aśvatthāman, etc. proceeded towards the lake and urged Duryodhana to fight with them against Yudhiṣṭhira. Duryodhana said that he would rest for that night and fight the next morning. Aśvatthāman swore to slay the Pāṇḍavas and all the Pāñcālas in this night. Certain hunters who used every day to procure a basketful of meat for Bhīmasena overheard the conversation between Duryodhana and Aśvatthāman, etc and informed Bhīmasena. The Pāṇḍavas all started towards the lake hearing the noise caused by them Aśvatthāman, etc took leave from Duryodhana and went away, and stopped under a banyan . Kṛṣṇa advised Yudhiṣṭhira to slay Duryodhana by putting forth his own powers of illusion . Yudhiṣṭhira tauntingly addressed Duryodhana for having fled from battle Duryodhana said that he had entered the lake not from fear, but in order to take rest. Yudhiṣṭhira asked Duryodhana to come out immediately and fight his foes. He answered that his king might be taken by his foes, his own desire being to enter the woods and retire from the world Yudhiṣṭhira taunted him for such an answer, refusing to take the king in gift from one who was unable to retain it by might .
Hraara, a Daitya. u, .
Hrī . u, .
Hrīmat, a Viśvadeva .
Hrīniṣeva, a Daitya. b, .
Hṛcchaya = Kāma, .
Hṛdika, father of Kṛtavarman .
Hṛdika, pl the family of Kṛtavarman .
Hṛdikasuta, Hṛdikātmaja = Kṛtavarman, q.v.
Hṛdya, a Ṛṣi .
Hṛṣīkeśa = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Hṛṣīkeśa, pl. a class of beings .
Hūhū, a Gandharva always mentioned together with Hāhā, q.v.
Hūṃhūṃhūṃkārapāra = Śiva .
Hūṃhūṃkārapriya = Śiva .
Hūṇa, pl a people . Hāra hūṇa, pl.
Huṇḍa, pl a people .
Huta = Śiva .
Hutabhuj1 = Agni, q.v. Do2 = Viṣṇu .
Hutāśa = Agni, q.v.
Hutāśana1 = Agni, q.v. Do. = Śiva .
Hutāśanasahāya = Śiva .
Hutāśanasuta = Skanda, .
Hutahavyavaha = Agni, q.v.
Hutavaha = Agni, q.v.
Ī = Śiva .
Icchā = Śiva .
Īśa1 = Brahmán, .
Īśa2 = Śiva, .
Īśa3 = Viṣṇu, .
Īśa4, the Supreme Being, in general, .
Īśa5, a Viśvadeva .
Īśa paśūnāṃ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Īśāna1 = Brahmán, .
Īśāna2 = Śiva, .
Īśāna3 = Viṣṇu, .
Īśāna4 = the Supreme Being, in general, .
Īśānādhyuṣita, a tīrtha .
Īśvara1 = Brahmán, .
Īśvara2 = Śiva, .
Īśvara3 = Indra, .
Īśvara4 = Skanda, .
Īśvara5 = Viṣṇu, .
Īśvara6 = the Supreme Being, in general, .
Īśvara7, a son of Pūru .
Īśvara8, a prince .
Īśvara9, name of a Rudra .
Īśvara1, a Viśvadeva .
Īśvareśvara = Viṣṇu .
Iḍā, .
Idhmavāha = Dṛdhasya, .
Īḍya = Śiva .
īhāmṛga, pl. .
Ījaka, pl a people .
Ījika, pl v. Ījaka, pl.
Ijya = Viṣṇu .
Ikṣulā, a river .
Ikṣumālavī, a river .
Ikṣumatī, a river in Kurukṣetra .
Ikṣvāku1, an ancient king, the son or great grandson of Manu Vaivasvata . b, . b, learnt the religion from Manu, cf Sudar śanop.the son of Manu and the father of sons, among whom Daśāśva was the tenthĀnuśāsanik.vaṃśajo rājā Saudāsaḥ, i.e. Kalmāṣapādaamong the kings who did not eat meat during the month of KārttikaenumerationSaṃvartta Maruttīyason of Kṣupa and grandson of Prasandhi, the son of Manufather of sons, among whom Viṃśa was the eldest
Ikṣvāku2, pl. .
Ikṣvāku3, sg. = Kuvalāśva, .
Ikṣvāku4, sg. = Bṛhadaśva, .
Ikṣvāku5, sg. = Haryaśva, .
Ikṣvākukanyā = Suvarṇā, .
Ikṣvākunandana1 = Lakṣmaṇa, the son of Daśaratha, .
Ikṣvākunandana2 = Rāma, the son of Daśaratha, .
Ikṣvākuvara = Mitrasaha, .
Ilā, the daughter of Manu Vaivasvata and the mother of Purūravas . b, . b, . Sudyumna.
Ilāspada, a tirtha .
Ilāvṛta, name of a varṣa .
Īlina, an ancient king .
Ilopahūta = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ilvala, an Asura, the brother of Vātāpi . Asura, Daiteya, Daitya, Daityendra, Dānava.
Indra, the chief of the devas, lord of rain, esp. named Śakra how Indra slew Viśvarūpa and Vṛtra, Nahuṣas becoming king of the gods and falling n again to the earth, .s regaining the sovereignty, b, .Sudarśanop.vapuṣaḥ, sc. Durjayasya, .Bhaṅgā svanop.agnistutam dviṣṭaṃdiscourse between . and BhaṅgāsvanaĀnuśāsanik.devāḥ sendrāḥ c, .Ānuśāsanik. .Upamanyu yajñendrabalarakṣaḥsu, so C but B. reads YakṣendraCiva in the shape of . Brahmendra Mahendra Viṣnusahitā devāḥ, so C but B. has Hutāśa instead of Mahendraāyudhasavarṇābhaṃ dhanuḥĀnuśā sanik.āyudhapinaddhāṅkaṃāgni Marutāṃ...gatiḥ, i.e. ŚivaSkandendrau, identified with Śivakalpena, sc. Taṇḍin, devaiḥ sendraiḥ b, .Vītahavyop.rūpeṇendra ivāparaḥ, sc. GṛtsamadaĀnuśā sanik.sendrās trayo lokāḥ, . b, .Ānuśāsanik.Bṛhaspateś ca saṃvādam sya, discourse between . and Bṛhaspati discourse between . and BrahmánPitāmahasya saṃvādam sya cadiscourse between . and Brahman about kineSuvarṇotpattiPage3 a sendreṣu lokeṣudevaiḥ...sendraiḥ b, . b, .ŚapathavidhiNahuṣop.Indro ham, sc. Nahuṣakariṣye nindraṃ, sc. Nahuṣaṃanindratvaṃ Nahuṣa became but cursed to become a serpent he fell n to the earth, also b, .Indralokasya lokāḥĀnuśāsanik.eṇa guhyaṃ nihitaṃ vai guhāyāṃ, i.e. the vow of fast, Nīl.kanyādhirūḍhañ ca vimānaṃ labhate naraḥ, Umā Maheśvarasaṃv.pūrveṇa vadanenāham tvam anuśāsmi ha, says Śivaeṇa ca purā vajraṃ kṣiptaṃ śrīkāṅkṣiṇā mama dagdhvā kaṇṭhan tu tad yātaṃ tena Śrīkaṇṭhatā mama, says ŚivaĀnuśāsanik.sendrā devās trayastriṃśatthe eleventh of the Ādityas e, .Vasiṣṭhasendrāḥ...tridivaukasaḥ, protected by VasiṣṭhaCyavanaCyavana paralysed the arm of . and created Mada. . then allowed the Aśvins to become partakers of the soma, Kapa, pl.sendrā divaukasaḥ, when the gods had entered the mouth of Mada, Cyavana took away from them the earthŚiva Śiva identified with .Avikṣitād anavaraḥ, sc. Avikṣitsamaḥ, sc. AvikṣitSamvartta MaruttīyaVāsavo py Asurān sarvān nirjitya ca nipātya ca tvaṃ prāpya lokeṣu tato vavre purohitaṃ, sc. Bṛhaspatitvaṃ prāptavān eko, says Indra .s relations to Bṛhaspati, Saṃvarta, and MaruttaVṛtrasya saha Vṛtreṇa yuddhaṃ, .s encounter with VṛtraBrāhmaṇagītāGuruśiṣyasaṃv Marutāṃ rājā b, in the shape of a brahman . assisted Uttaṅka, .AgastyaAgastya caused . to pour n rainĀśramavāsap.samāḥ, sc. the Pāṇḍavas, .Mahāprasthānikap. put Yudhiṣṭhira to the testSvargārohaṇap.saṅkāśaṃ, sc. Arjuna. put Yudhiṣṭhira to the testDevarāṭau, i.e. Indra and ViṣṇuPage3 b Śatakratuḥto be worshipped in Amarāṇāṃ hradasainyasaprabhaṃjuṣṭān...lokānkalpayādṛk purā vṛttaṃ Śambara yoḥ, sc. yuddhaṃyathā pūrvam abhūd yuddhaṃ Śambara yoḥTridivam ivā rakṣitaṃtejasāsadṛśau yuddhe Śambara yoḥyādṛśo vai purā vṛttaḥ Śambara yoḥivaivacf. Additionsthe husband of ŚacīSahasrākṣaḥVajrahastaḥSahasrā kṣaṃ, C. has by error SDeva rājaḥsamaṃ, sc. Droṇaṃir ivāsurānŚakrasyaDeveśaVāsavaṃŚakraṃfather of ArjunaSūryaupratimatejasaḥsamaḥ, sc. Bhagadattaḥpraised in the hymn vv. b bhavane ...Śsyasya yajñaḥ śatasaṅkhyaḥVajrapāṇir yathāyathā Śo Bṛhaspateḥ, sc. āsanaṃ kalpayām āsayathādevāḥ Śpurogāḥotsavenaādayaḥone of the ĀdityasAditeḥ putrāḥ Śmukhyāḥsaṃsadaṃyathā Śo MarutpatiḥViṣnū ivāparauBalahāpratimatejasaḥfather of Arjunapratimatejasā, i.e. Śāntanubegot Arjunaamong the fathers of the Pāṇḍavasdhvajam ivocchritaṃ, C. has by error Saśobhata...Ceṇevāmarāvatīpratimaṃ, i.e. Arjunasyāṃśaḥ Pāṇḍavaḥ Savyasācī, i.e. Arjunaprakhyānāyudhasamauivaprayayau...yathā Śa Amarāvatīṃyathāsya salokatāṃsya sabhāsya sabhāyāṃsya saṃsadipratyudyayau...Śṃ Bala ivāsuraḥViṣṇū...Tārakāmayeād anavaraḥ, i.e. Bhagadattasyeva Tripiṣṭapeyathāslew Namucisya nītiṃeṇāpi samaḥpratimatejasaḥobtained a hymn to Sūrya from Brahmán and communicated it to Nārada, C. has by error Sdiscourse with SurabhiPage3 a Brahma Śaṅkara Śādyair devavṛndaiḥivasya samaprabhāvaḥSureśvaraṃāśanisamair muṣṭibhiḥābhi ṣekesya purīṃ tām Amarāvatīṃsya dayitāṃ purīṃāsaneāsanaṃtulyaṃ, sc. ArjunaāsanaṃVṛtrani sūdanaḥ, ŚacīpatiḥŚacīpatiḥBala Vṛtrahām ivāpsarāḥ, sc. upatiṣṭhatiivasya bhavanaṃvajrābhihataḥ, sc. Vṛtradevāḥ Śpuro gamāḥsama dyuteḥ, sc. Māndhātṛsamaṃpradeśinīṃ Śdattāṃ, given to Māndhātṛ to sucksyārdhāsanaṃspardhamānasya Śeṇa, sc. Yayāteḥād anavaraḥ, sc. Arjunasadanaprakhyaṃ, sc. the hermitage of Nara and Nārāyaṇadhvajam ivocchritaṃvattulyabalopamaṃVṛtrahāsadmaniripupramāthī, i.e. Arjunasya bhavanaṃ...Amarāvatīṃsya bhavaneNahuṣa fell from the seat of Ś.a king is like to Ś.ādīn...devagaṇān, seen by Mārkaṇḍeya in the stomach of Nārāyaṇaś cāhaṃ Surādhipaḥ, says NārāyaṇaBaka Ś samāgamaṃtrayas triṃśad yathā devāḥ sarve Ś purogamāḥAirāvataṃ samāsthāyaDaiteyā iva Śeṇa, sc. dahya mānāḥivayathāsya... sadanātViṣṇu gave the earth to Ś.prabhṛtayaḥ...surasattamāḥād ana varaṃ, sc. Daśarathapratimatejasā, sc. SugrīvaPrahlādayor iva, sc. yuddhaṃdeva Gandharvāḥ Śpurogamāḥdevaiḥ Śpuro gamaiḥdevāḥ...Śpurogamāḥpratimagauravān, sc. the brothers of Yudhiṣṭhirasya vajraṃTridaśānāṃ yathā Śḥvipulau bāhū sc. Durgās Śdhvajasamucchrayauheld Gāṇḍīva eighty five yearsgave a diadem to Arjunasya sc. sārathiḥ MātaliḥArjuna had learnt the use of weapons from Ś.came to see the fightArjuna had learnt the use of weapons from Ś. Vaiśravaṇopamaḥ, sc. Yudhiṣṭhiraivasya mahiṣī, i.e. Śacīsya mahiṣīṃ, i.e. ŚacīSuragaṇeśvaraḥsamo Dhanañjayaḥ, i.e. Arjunadevaḥdevāḥ sa Śāḥviviśuḥ...surāḥ Śsayathādevāḥ saha Śeṇahad given weapons to Arjunapratimatejasaḥ, i.e. BhīmasenaBhaumanaḥ saha Śeṇasamaḥ, sc. Bhīmasenaivasya dayitaḥ suhṛt, sc. Mātaliḥsyāyaṃ i.e. Mātali sakhā caiva mantrī sārathir eva casya sakhā, i.e. MātaliPage3 b Devarājaṃwill side with the Pāṇḍavasyatra i.e. in the east Śo bhyaṣicyataatra i.e. in the south vṛttena Vṛtro pi Śśatrutvam īyivānatra i.e. in the west devīṃ Ditiṃ suptām ātmaprasavadhāriṇīṃ vigarbhām akaroc Cho yatra jāto Marud gaṇaḥBalanisūdanaḥsamān, sc. the Pāṇḍavasivasaptamāc cāpi divasād amāvāsyā bhaviṣyati saṅgrāmo yujyatāṃ tasyāṃ, tām āhuḥ Śdaivatāṃivasamadyute, i.e. Yudhiṣṭhiraulkāḥ...Śāśanisamaprabhāḥperformed sacrifices on Meruonly C B. has satraṃivasya...salokatāṃādibhiḥ suraiḥivaa ivāmareśaḥāśanisamasvanaṃBalaṃ Śa ivāhavecāpasamaprabhaṃ, sc. the bow of Śvetacāpopamaṃ, sc. the bow of Śaṅkhaāśanisamasparśaṃpratimānakalpaṃ Indrāt majaṃ, i.e. Arjunaivasamaḥ, sc. Abhimanyudevāḥ Śpurogamāḥyathā Śas Triviṣṭapeyathā Śḥ...purā vivyādha Dānavaṃ Vipracittiṃmahāśanir yathā bhraṣtā Śmuktāivayathā Devāsure yuddhe Ś Śambarayoḥ purā, sc. samāgamaḥMayaṃ Śakra ivāhaveāśanisamadyutiṃsamāḥyathovāca purā Śṃ mahābuddhir Bṛhaspatiḥāśanisamasparśāncāpopamaṃ, sc. the bow of BhīṣmaMaya Śau yathā purāyathā Śo Vajrapāṇir dārayan parvatān uttamānyathāivamukhāḥ surāḥivayathā Devāsure yuddhe Bala Cauāśaniravo pamaḥyathā Śrathaḥāśanihatā drumavanta ivācalāḥsyātithitāṃ gatāḥ, C. has by error Śaktaivav. Draupadeya, pl.opamāḥAirāvatagataṃv. Draupadeya, pl.ivasadmagataḥ, sc. Abhimanyusamaṃ, sc. Abhimanyuopamaḥ, sc. Hari, the son of Akampanapratimavikramāḥfather of ArjunaSūryaguṇodayaṃ, sc. Śivaādīṃś ca surotta mānJambhau yathā purādevagaṇaiḥ sahadhvajasamaprabhaṃ, sc. the standard of Aśvatthā manPrahlādaṃ samare jitvā yathā Śakraṃ Marud gaṇāḥŚambarayor iva, sc. yuddhaṃtulyaparākramaiḥ, sc. Śakaiḥpratimaḥ... Sātyakiḥbhallena Śāśanisannibhenatrailo kyakāṅkṣiṇor āsīc Ch Prahlādayor iva, sc. yuddhaṃtulyabalaḥ, sc. Sātyakiyathā Vṛtravadhe devāḥ purā Śṃ maharṣayaḥ, sc. parivavruḥiva Vairocanī yathā, sc. yuyudhātecāpam ivāparaṃpurā Devāsure yuddhe Śsya Balinā yathāāśanisphoṭasamaṃ, sc. ninādaṃbalaṃ... Rudra Śāntakopamaṃtvatprasādāt, Hṛṣīkeśa, Śḥ Suragaṇeśvaraḥ trailokyavijayaṃ śrīmān prāptavānSureśatvaṃ gataḥ Śo hatvā Daityān sahasraśaḥ Prahlādayor iva, sc. yuddhaṃopamāḥAmoghāṃ...śaktiṃ Śvinirmitāṃ, i.e. the dart of KarṇaAmoghā datteyaṃ śaktiḥ Śeṇa, = tulya balaḥivaṃ Daityā yathā purā, sc. ayodha yantayathā Devāsure yuddhe Śsya saha Dānavaiḥaṃ Daityacamūm iva, sc. āyāntaṃ Prahrā dayor iva, sc. yuddhaṃiva Prahrādayor iva, sc. yuddhaṃyāṃ vai prādāt Sūryaputrāya i.e. Karṇa Śḥ kuṇḍalābhyāṃ nimāya, sc. śaktiṃ, i.e. Amoghāśaktyā, = yathā Śo Vṛtravadhe Marudbhiḥ, sc. pūjyamānaḥdattayā, sc. śaktyā, i.e. Amoghāmuktā ivāśaniḥPage3 a dattā, sc. śaktiḥ, i.e. Amoghādattayā, sc. śaktyā, = Pārthe vā Śkalpe, i.e. Arjunayathā kruddho raṇe Śo Dānavānāṃ kṣayaṃ purāgajah Śgajopamaḥivayathācāpam ivāparaṃsya vajreṇaādīṃś ca surotta mānsamānavīryaḥ Śalyaḥśaktyā, i.e. Amoghāyathā Devāsure yuddhe Jambha Śaua ivāsurān, sc. chittvāyathaiva cāsito meghaḥ Ścāpena i.e. by the rainbow śobhitaḥJiṣnuḥ ŚtulyaparākramaḥViṣṇusamaṃ, sc. vīryaṃśaktivinākṛtaṃ, sc. KarṇaVijaya, the bow of Karṇa, had been given by Ś. to Rāma Jāmad agnyadevatānāṃ...sa ŚāṇāṃMarud vṛtaḥdevāḥ Śpurogamāḥsya sārathye ...Mātalivatdhanuṣī śreṣṭhe Ścāpanibhetulyaparākramaḥ, sc. Drauṇiḥniruddhāḥ... jihīrṣavo mṛtaṃ Daityāh Śāgnibhyām ivāsakṛteṇeva yathā Daityān hanyamānānyathāsyātithitāṃ gatvā, sc. the Saṃśaptakashate mahāsure Jambhe Ś Viṣṇū yathā Guruḥ, sc. abhyanandattulyabalaḥ, sc. Karṇaśauryeṇa Śsyatulyaparākramāḥtulyaparākramauivaprayaccha medinīṃ rājñe Śāyaiva Harir yathāeṇeva yathāśaniṃivacāpapratimena dhanvanāivaŚambara Śyor yathā, sc. yuddhaṃviddhveva Śṃ NamuciḥŚambarayor iva, sc. yuddhaṃo Namucer ivāreḥLokapālāḥ sa Śāḥdhanuś ca tac Chśarā sanopamaṃāśaniprakhyaruciḥ, sc. sāyakaḥtulyabalāḥyathā Śdhvajaiḥāśanir ivot sṛṣṭaḥyathā pūrvaṃ Śsyāsurasaṃkṣayeeṇevāsure bale, sc. hateJambho yathā Śsamāgamād vai nāgendram Airāvaṇam Indravāhyaṃ, sc. pratyudyayauBaliṃ Śa ivāhave, sc. yodhayano Vṛtram ivāhvayanvīryopamāḥyathā...SurarāṭSurādhipaḥVṛtra Śau yathāhaveyuddhāya Śo Vṛtram ivāhvayanVirocanas tu Śeṇa māyayā nirjitaḥvispardhinaḥyathā Śḥ sādayitvā mahāsurānŚiva is identified with Ś.sya Balinā yathā, sc. yuddhaṃtridivaṃ...Śsyao Devapatir yathāo yathā Daityabalāni, sc. nihatyaopamaDevarājaṃ Purandaraṃdevāḥ...ŚśreṣṭhāhMarudgaṇair vṛtaḥBhīṣma had obtained weapons from Ś.ivadevān...ŚpurogamānBṛhaspateś ca saṃvādaṃ Śsya casyaiti salokatāṃsakhā Śsya...Māndhātāsyaiti salokatāṃdevāḥ Śpuro gamāḥŚriyā Śsya saṃvādaṃpramukhaiś ca daivataiḥbalekathāṃPage3 b devāḥ sarve Śpurogamāḥdevāḥ Śpuro gamāḥpurogāś ca LokapālāḥDeveśvaraḥViṣṇu will bestow the sovereignty on Ś.tulyaparākramāḥpratispardhī, sc. Rāvaṇasalokatāṃattacked by Mandaraaed ŚivaŚiva assumed the form of Ś.Śiva then assumed his own formtulyaparākramaḥ, sc. Māndhātṛādyā devatāḥŚiva is identified with Ś.osi Marutāṃ, sc. Śivasa Prajāpati Śāntaṃ jagatlearnt the names of ŚivaCāruśīrṣaḥ ...Śsya dayitaḥ sakhāśāpāc ChsyaGṛtsamadaḥ...Śsya dayitaḥ sakhātvaṃparākrame Śsamaṃ, sc. BhīṣmaDivodāsa built Vārāṇasī at the injunction of Ś.syevāmarāvatīṃGṛtsamada was meant to be Ś.Śambarasaṃvādaṃmāyāṃ Śsyavarṣativasati...Śeṇa sahaeṇa saha modateyajñayathāTribhuvaneśvaraḥBalanisūdanaṃdevāḥ Śpuro gamāḥprācyāṃ Śāya, sc. balikarma prayojayetvarṣatitulyaprabhāvāṇāṃonly C read Śukra with B. VasubhiḥKṛṣṇa identified with Ś.paralysed by Kṛṣṇaādiṣu deveṣuŚacīpatiḥ Harimāngataḥ SarvalokāmaratvaṃgṛhopamaṃKṛṣṇa identified with Ś.sadmapratikāśaḥsadṛśaṃ rūpaṃ Ścāpasyasamakarmāṇaṃ, sc. Arjunatejasaḥ, sc. Yudhi ṣṭhirayajñesadaḥ...Śṃ Śacīpatiṃtejasi, sc. Arjuna devāḥ ŚpurogamāḥSurapatiḥsya bhavaneeṇa saha modatethe slayer of Śambarayathāyathā Śā purā Baliṃ, sc. avidhyat C. has Sthe slayer of Śambara and PākaSahasranayanaś cāpi Vajrīperformer of a hundred sacrificesSahasrākṣaḥ ...varṣeṇāpālayaṭ prajāḥsākṣād api Śḥgurur mānyaḥ Śoḥ, i.e. BṛhaspatiSahasrākṣaṃ DeveśaṃDevarājaṃoḥ, sc. sabhār ivāparaḥAsurān parājitya jagat pāti ŚḥapiAmaraśreṣṭhaḥDevarājaḥivaivayathāArjuna obtained celestial weapons from Ś.Devarājaḥāsanena Śḥ, sc. tṛptaḥdevāḥ Śpurogamāḥivakarma...Śor vā Daityasenāsu saṅkhyesākṣād api Śḥdevaṃ vāpi Śṃśāsanād vā Śoḥivaparākramaṃ, sc. Bhīṣmacame to see the battleapi sākṣāt Śḥivam ivācintyaṃ purā Vṛtreṇa nirjitaṃsākṣād api Śḥau cāpi devasattameapiivaivayena i.e. with the bow, of Karṇa Daityagaṇān, rājan, jitavān vai Śḥapi...sākṣāt Śoḥivaṃ Vṛtranijaghnuṣaṃ yathāyathā purā Vṛtravadhe Śḥor yathā pūrvaṃ mahatyā Daityasenayā, sc. vimardaḥDevarājaḥyathāorigin of the namesākṣād api Śuḥmāyayā ca Śoḥkratum āhṛtya śatakṛtvaḥivaivaoś ca saṃvādaṃ Namuceś caDevarājesarvaiḥ kratuśatair iṣṭaṃ, na tvam ekaḥ sc. Śakra Śḥyathāsalokatāṃ...ŚoḥDevarājaḥś ca bhagavān Viṣṇuś cāditi nandanauor acintyasya sattre varṣasahasrikepuri Śor apiivaVṛtrahaṇaṃVṛtrahaṇaṃ Devarājaḥyathā...Śor Vajradharasya yajñesākṣād api Śḥivasākṣād api Śoḥyāthā nihatyārigaṇān Śr divaṃ, sc. yayauivaVṛtreṇeva Śoḥ, sc. yuddhaṃDevarājaḥvikramaḥhaving thousand eyesthe king of the godsvajreṇa coditenathe lord of the godsyathājahi...Vṛtraṃ yathā r Mahendraḥajayad r Baliṃ Vairocaniṃ purāVṛtraṃ r yathā, sc. jaghānaslew VṛtraŚakro r yathāyathāthe king of the godsāḍ iva Nandaneivamuñcan āḍ aśanīm ivaVajrapāṇiḥapiVṛtraṃ hatvāSahasrākṣaḥena dattām divyāṃ śaktiṃŚatakratuḥsama dyutiḥfather of Arjunapratimaṃsamadyutiḥsamadyutiḥsamadyuteḥsadṛśaḥsamo yudhisamaprabhaṃparākramāḥŚatakratuṃrathaṃŚata kratuṃsamadyutīsya bhavanaṃsamadyutiḥMātalir ayaṃ sya sārathiḥat Jātismarahrada . went to heaven after having performed sacrificesread yaṃ instead of yaṃsutām ivaPage3 b PurandaraḥPurandaraḥSahasrākṣaṃastraṃ...dayitaṃ syavajraṃ... sya dayitaṃ bhīmam astraṃsya bhavanaṃapiBaka Dālbhyau... sakhāyau syaŚatakratuḥśaktir sya, i.e. Amoghāvimā naṃ syavimānan syasya dayitāṃ, sc. ŚacīŚatakratuḥyathāsahaputraḥ Śacīpatiḥsya purī varyā marāvatīŚakraṃivaivaniveśaneopamaḥyathā...camūpratimaṃdevaśa trūn iva ḥ Kirīṭamālīivasya... sakhā, sc. Bhagadattayathā Daityacamūṃ... o mamarda haŚatakratuḥŚakraṃ...Purandaraṃsamadyutiṃsamadyutiḥsamadyutiṃsya māyayāgṛhopamaṃapisamīpataḥŚata kratauālayaṃa ivāparaḥ, . Devarājan, . Deveśa, q.v. Devendra, . Gośabdātmaja, q.v. Hari, . Hariśmaśru, . Harihaya, . Harimat, . Harivāhana, . Īśvara, q.v. Jagadīśvara, q.v. Kāśyapa, q.v. Kauśika, q.v. Kirīṭin, q.v. Kuśikottama, q.v. Lokatrayeśa, . Lokeśvareśvara, . Maghavat, . Purandara, . Puruhūta, . Pūṣānuja, . Puṣkarekṣaṇa, . Sahasradṛś, . Sahasrākṣa, . Vibudhaśreṣṭha, . Vibudhādhipa, . Vibudhādhipati, . Vibudheśvara, . Viśvabhuj, . Vṛṣākapi, . Vṛtraśatru, . Vṛtrahan, . Vṛtrahantṛ, . Vṛtranisūdana, .
Indra, pl. . b, . b, . b, .
Indra2 = Skanda, .
Indra3 = Sūrya, .
Indra4 = Śiva
Indrābha, son of the elder Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Indradamana, a prince, a descendant of Atri . Ātreya.
. After some time Yudhiṣṭhira taught Arjuna in private the science that would reveal the whole universe to him, and told him to practise severe austerities Bhīṣma, etc know the fourfold Dhanur veda, the Brāhma weapon, etc. all celestial weapons are in the possession of Indra, imparted to him by the celestials from fear of Vṛtra. Then Arjuna took up the Gāṇḍīva, etc blessed by brahmans, Siddhas, and invisible spirits, and by Kṛṣṇā, who wished him success from Dhātṛ, Vidhātṛ, Hrī, Śrī, Kīrti, Dhṛti, Puṣṭi, Umā, Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, the Vasus, Rudras, Ādityas, the hosts of the Maruts, the Viśvedevas, and the Sādhyas, and wished him safety from the spirits of the sky, earth, and heaven, and all other enemies and having walked round his brothers and Dhaumya, he set out towards the north. All creatures left the path of Arjuna, who was urged by the desire of beholding Indra . He passed over many mountains, and reached Himavat in one day by means of his yoga then he passed over Gandhamādana, etc and reached Indrakīla, walking night and day untiringly. Here he was addressed by a voice in the skies, and beheld Indra in the guise of a brahman, who told him to throw away his bow as of no use there, as this was the abode only of peaceful brahmans, and advised him to wish for heavenly bliss but Arjuna only asked for the celestial weapons, which Indra said he should obtain when he had seen Śiva . Then Indra disappeared, and Arjuna remained, devoted to yoga .
Indradyumna1, a rājarṣi . b, .
Indradyumna2, a brahman .
Indradyumna3, a lake . next.
Indradyumnasaras, a lake . the prec.
. The Pāṇḍavas asked Mārkaṇḍeya Is there anybody that is older than thou He related The rājarṣi Indradyumna, who had fallen from heaven, complained that his fame must have passed away, and asked me if recognized him as did not, he became a horse and carried me to the Himavat to the owl Prāvārakarṇa, who was older than the owl we took to the lake Indradyumna to the crane Nāḍījaṅgha, who was older than the owl the crane indicated us the tortoise Akūpāra in the same lake. Akūpāra knew Indradyumna, and said that Indradyumna had planted the yūpa, times, and that this lake had been excavated by the feet of the cows given away by him to the brahmans. Then a chariot came from heaven, and a celestial voice called Indradyumna back to heaven . He first brought me and the owl to our respective places, and then went away in that chariot. The Pāṇḍavas praised Mārkaṇḍeya for having caused Indradyumna to regain his sphere he said that Kṛṣṇa also had raised the rājarṣi Nṛga from hell and caused him to regain heaven .
Indrajāla, a celestial weapon . Aindra.
. Indrajit tied Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa in a network of those arrows of his which he had obtained as boons. Sugrīva and the monkeys Suṣeṇa, etc surrounded them. Vibhī ṣaṇa came and roused them with the Prajñāstra Sugrīva extracted the arrows and applied the medicine viśalyā from the mountain Śveta a Guhyaka of Kuberas brought water, by rubbing ones eyes with which all invisible creatures became visible. Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, Sugrīva, etc rubbed their eyes. Having informed Rāvaṇa, Indrajit returned without having completed his daily sacrifice receiving a hint from Vibhīṣaṇa, Lakṣmaṇa killed Indrajit. Rāvaṇa would kill Sītā, but was dissuaded by Avindhya .
. Rāvaṇa sent Indrajit to fight Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, and Sugrīva. He first fought with Lakṣmaṇa, then with Aṅgada, then he became invisible, but continued to fight .
Indrajit, a Rākṣasa, son of Rāvaṇa . Rāvaṇātmaja, Rāvaṇi.
Indrakarman = Viṣṇu .
Indrakīla, a mountain .
Indraloka . b, . Śakraloka.
Indralokābhigamana .
. After the Lokapālas had gone away, Arjuna began to think of the chariot of Indra, which, guided by Mātali, came n full of swords, missiles, maces, thunderbolts, etc and great Nāgas with fiery mouths, and drawn by, horses of golden hue, and with the flagstaff Vaijayanta . Mātali, descending, invited him to ascend the chariot, as Indra waited to behold him, surrounded by gods, ṛṣis, Gandharvas, and Apsarases. As that chariot cannot be obtained even by hundreds of rājasūyas and horse sacrifices, and as even gods and Dānavas are not competent to ride in it, and as he that has no ascetic merit is not competent even to see or touch it, Arjuna first let Mātali ascend it and control the horses. Then he purified himself in the Gaṅgā, repeated his prayers, gratified the Pitṛs, and bade farewell to the Mandara mountain . Then he ascended, in the chariot, through the sky and beheld thousands of vimānas of extra ordinary beauty there was no sun or moon or fire, but they blazed in light of their own, generated by virtue and ascetic merit and the stars, which from earth look small in con sequence of their distance, but are very large, were seen by him in their places and rājarṣis who had attained siddhi, and heroes fallen in battle, and those that had obtained heaven by tapas and Gandharvas, and Guhyakas, and ṛṣis, and Apsarases. Mātali explained to him that the stars were virtuous persons stationed in their respective places . At the gates he beheld Airāvata with four tusks equal to Kailāsa. Continuing along the path of the Siddhas, he passed through the regions of kings, and thus passing through Svargaloka he beheld Amarāvatī, the city of Indra . When Arjuna had entered the city, praised by Apsarases, Gandharvas, Siddhas, great ṛṣis, and gods, he, at the request of Indra, went to the large starry way named Suravīthī, where he met with the Sādhyas, Viśvas, Maruts, Aśvins, Ādityas, Vasus, Rudras, Brahmarṣis, Rājarṣis with Dilīpa at their head, Tumburu, Nārada, Hāhā, and Hūhū. Then he beheld Indra, eulogized by Gandharvas headed by Viśvāvasu, etc and was seated on Indras own seat and Gandharvas, headed by Tumburu, sang to them, and thousands of Apsarases danced there . The gods and Gandharvas offered him arghya, etc and caused him to enter the palace of Indra. There he received Indras weapons, the thunder bolt and lightning . At the request of Indra he dwelt there for five years, and learned the dance and music of the Gandharvas from Citrasena, whom Indra gave him as a friend, but he was longing for his brothers and Kuntī and thirsting for revenge . In the beginning, seeing that the eyes of Arjuna were fixed upon Urvaśī, Indra despatched Citrasena to Urvaśī, who gladly consented to choose Arjuna for her lover . Urvaśī related to Arjuna that as he had looked on her only in a solemn assembly of celestials held on account of his coming, where the Rudras, Ādityas, Aśvins, Vasus, Maharṣis, Rājarṣis, Siddhas, Cāraṇas, Yakṣas, and Mahoragas were present, and the Gandharvas played the vīṇās, and the Apsarases danced, Indra had caused Citrasena to send her to him, and that she was herself in love with him. Arjuna declared that he regarded her as the wife of his guru, and that he had been gazing at her because she was the mother of the Paurava race. She replied that the sons and grandsons of Pūrus race, that had come thither in consequence of ascetic merit, did all sport with the Apsarases without incurring any sin. But Arjuna swore that he regarded her as his mother. She then cursed him, saying that he should have to pass his time among females as a dancer and destitute of manhood, and then went away. Indra told him that this would come to pass in the thirteenth year of their exile, when they would live unknown to all, but having passed one year thus he would regain his manhood. The desire of the man that listens to this history of Arjuna never runs after lustful ends, etc. . One day the brahmarṣi Lomaśa in the course of his wanderings went to the abode of Indra. As Lomaśa within himself wondered how Arjuna, being a kṣatriya, had attained the seat of Śakra, who was worshipped by the gods themselves, Śakra, knowing his thoughts, explained to him who Arjuna really was that moreover the Asuras, the sons of Danu, named the Nivātakavacas, who dwell in Pātāla, proud of a boon they had acquired, were planning the destruction of the gods, and could not be slain by others than either Kṛṣṇa or Arjuna but Madhusūdana should not be urged when the task was insignificant, lest his energy should consume the whole universe therefore Arjuna should slay them. At the request of Indra, seconded by Arjuna, Lomaśa went to the Kāmyaka wood to Yudhiṣṭhira in order to bring him news about Arjuna and recommend him to visit the tīrthas, and follow him and protect him from the Rākṣasas . As Dhṛtarāṣṭra learnt from Dvaipā yana of Arjunas arrival and stay at Indras abode, he expressed his anxiety to Sañjaya . Conversation of Sañjaya and Dhṛtarāṣṭra about Arjunas encounter with Śiva in the guise of a Kirāta, etc. . During the five years of Arjunas absence the Pāṇḍavas fed themselves and, snātaka brahmans, some with and some without fire, by killing deer, Yudhiṣṭhira going towards the east, Bhīma towards the south, and the twins towards the west and north . Having heard of the way of life of the Pāṇḍavas, Dhṛtarāṣṭra expressed his anxiety before Sañjaya, fearing Bhīma with his iron mace, etc. Sañjaya commemorated how Kṛṣṇa, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, Virāṭa, Dhṛṣṭa ketu, and the Kaikeyas had visited the Pāṇḍavas in the Kāmyaka wood, whose conversations Sañjaya had learnt through spies and formerly told Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya further related that Kṛṣṇa had consented to become the charioteer of Arjuna and to assist the Pāṇḍavas in the battle, together with Rāma, Akrūra, Gada, Śāmba, Pradyumna, Āhuka, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, and the son of Śiśupāla, and Yuyu dhāna, and the Kaikeya and Pāñcāla princes and the Matsya king, and Kṛṣṇa had declared that Yudhiṣṭhira should, along with his brothers living at Hāstinapura, rule the earth .
Indramālā .
Indramārga, a tīrtha . c, . g, .
. b Bhīṣma said Once a brahman obtained a son named Mataṅga, who, though procreated by a person of a different order, had, however, the rites of infancy and youth performed according to the ordinances laid n for brahmans. His father, desiring to perform a sacrifice, ordered him to collect the articles, and he set out riding in a car drawn by a young ass, that bore away the car to its mother Mataṅga repeatedly struck the animal with his goad on its nose but the old she ass consoled it, saying, A Cāṇḍāla it is that is driving thee there is no severity in a brahman. Asked by Mataṅga, the she ass revealed to him that his father was a Śūdra following the profession of a barber, who begat him upon a brahman woman excited with desire thou art, therefore, a Cāṇḍāla by birth. Mataṅga returned home, told his father what he had heard, retired to the forest, and began to undergo the austerest penances in order to acquire the status of a brahman, so that he scorched the very deities. Indra came and offered him boons, but the status of a brahman, he said, could not be won by penances . Mataṅga then stood for years on one foot. Indra came once more and said From the order of brute life one attains to the state of humanity if born as a human being, one is sure to take birth as a Pukkaśa or a Cāṇḍāla after, years one attains to the status of a Śūdra then after, years that of a Vaiśya after a period that is sixty times longer, that of a kṣatriya after a period that is sixty times longer than this, to that of a fallen brahman after a period times as long, to that of a brahman living by the profession of arms after a period times as long, to that of a brahman reciting the Gāyatrī and sacred mantras after a period times as long, to that of a brahman conversant with the entire Vedas and the scriptures . Mataṅga then practised austerer penances, standing on one foot for, years in yoga meditation. Indra once more came and said the same. Mataṅga then repaired to Gayā, and there passed years on one foot in yoga, and was reduced to only skin and bones, and dropped n on the ground from sheer exhaustion. Indra came quickly now Mataṅga accepted the boons that he should be celebrated as chaneva, and obtain the worship of all women, and his fame should become unrivalled in the three worlds .
Indrāṇī = Śacī, q.v.
Indrānuja = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Indraparvata, a mountain .
Indraprabhava = Arjuna, .
Indraprastha, the capital of the Pāṇḍavas . also the following synonyms Śakraprastha, . Śakrapurī, . Śatakratuprastha, . Khāṇḍavaprastha, .
Indrasena1, a son of the elder Parikṣit .
Indrasena2, the charioteer of Yudhiṣṭhira .
Indrasena2, the son of Nala and Damayantī .
Indrasena4, a Kuru warrior .
Indrasenā, the daughter of Nala and Damayantī .
Indrasenā, the daughter of Nārāyaṇa and the wife of Mudgala . c the daughter of Nārāyaṇa, who was renowned for her beauty, followed her husband, who was, years old, .
Indrasuta = Arjuna, .
Indratāpana, an Asura .
Indratīrtha, a tīrtha. y, . bb There Indra had performed horse sacrifices, and given away enormous wealth to Bṛhaspati, etc. On account of this Indra came to be called Śatakratu, and the tīrtha to be called Indratīrtha, .
Indrātmaja = Arjuna, .
Indratoyā, a tīrtha. e By bathing in near Gandhamādana, and in Karatoyā in Kuraṅga, after three days fasting, one acquires the merit of a horse sacrifice, .
Indrāvaraja = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Indravarman, a Mālava king .
. Questioned by Yudhiṣṭhira about the misery endured by Indra and Śacī, Śalya related Once the Prajāpati Tvaṣṭṛ, from antipathy to Indra, created a son who had three heads, called Viśvarūpa. Beholding his austerities, Indra became alarmed, and in vain caused Apsarases to tempt him then he slew him with his thunderbolt, but was yet afraid of his appearance, and prevailed upon a carpenter to cut off the heads out flew birds partridges, sparrows and hawks, quails. Then Tvaṣṭṛ created Vṛtra, who swallowed up Indra. The gods created Jṛmbhikā Vṛtra yawned, and Indra emerged. Tvaṣṭṛ strengthened Vṛtra Indra returned the gods consulted with the munis, and sitting on Mount Mandara, they thought of Viṣṇu . Indra, with . and Ṛ repaired to Viṣṇu, who taught them, with Ṛ. and G to make eternal friendship between Indra and Vṛtra . Indra then slew him in the evening with froth blended with the thunderbolt, in which Viṣṇu had entered. G Y Rā M. U and Ṛ. glorified Indra. But Indra was overpowered by falsehood and brahmanicide, and became bereft of his consciousness, and lay concealed in water the earth became treeless, the rivers were interrupted, the rains ceased . Then Ṛ. and . crowned Nahuṣa as king of giving him their tapas whatever being may stand within thy sight Dā Y Rā P G Bh. thou shalt absorb his power. Nahuṣa then assumed a sensual turn of mind, amusing himself with Aps. and devakanyāḥ and Viśvāvasu, Nārada, G and the six seasons, in Nandana, and on Kailāsa, Himavat, Mandara, Śveta, Sahya, Mahendra, Malaya, etc. He ordained that Śacī should wait upon him. Śacī repaired to Bṛhaspati, who promised soon to unite her with Indra . Nahuṣa became enraged the earth, with As G K M. U trembled Nahuṣa reminded of Indras behaviour towards Ahalyā, etc. at last the gods promised to bring him Śacī but Bṛhaspati, as a brahman, would not aban her, quoting a saying of Brahmán he told her to ask for time from Nahuṣa, and so did the gods, led by Agni . Śacī obtained the boon from Nahuṣa, and returned to Bṛhaspati. with Agni, repaired to Viṣṇu, who said Let Indra offer sacrifice to me having performed the horse sacrifice, he will regain his dignity. . and Ṛ. and Bṛhaspati proceeded to the spot where Indra was, performed a Horse sacrifice, and divided the brahmahatyā among trees and rivers and mountains and earth and women and Indra was free from fever, but vanished again from fear of Nahuṣa. Śacī worshipped Niśā, who caused Upaśruti to appear, and Śacī prayed to Upaśruti . Upaśruti, followed by Śacī, crossed the heavenly groves and many mountains and came to the northern side of Himavat, and thence to the sea in an island there was a large lake with an assemblage of lotuses there they found Indra in the fibres of a lotus stalk, and, praising him, Śacī implored his help against Nahuṣa . Indra said that Nahuṣa had been strengthened by the Ṛ. with the merits of offerings to . and P. Śacī should tell Nahuṣa to visit her on a vehicle borne by Ṛ. Nahuṣa consented. Śacī prevailed upon Bṛhaspati to find out Indra, which he did by means of a sacrifice, prevailing upon Agni to search for him. Agni came back within the twinkling of an eye, having searched everywhere except in the waters, which he dared not enter . Bṛhaspati praised Agni and strengthened him with hymns of the Veda Agni then found out Indra, and soon returned and informed Bṛhaspati. This came with . ṛ. and G and praised Indra by referring to his former deeds . Indra increased little by little, and having assumed his original form he grew strong, and asked what business yet remained, as he had killed Viśvarūpa and Vṛtra. Bṛhaspati told him of Nahuṣa, who had been strengthened by the power of the . ṛ etc and how Nahuṣa, carried by M. ṛ journeyed from world to world. Lp. Kubera and Yama Vaivasvata and Soma and Varuṇa came and rejoiced that Viśvarūpa and Vṛtra had been killed, and they and Agni promised him their assistance against Nahuṣa on the condition that they and Agni should have their shares in sacrifices, and that Kubera, Yama, and Varuṇa should this day be crowned along with Indra . While Indra, with Lp. and was considering the means of slaying Nahuṣa, the M. ṛ. Agastya came and rejoiced that Viśvarūpa and Vṛtra had been killed, and related how Nahuṣa had been hurled from heaven . The . ṛ. and B. ṛ weary with carrying him, had questioned him if certain mantras pronounced by Brahmán were authentic, to which Nahuṣa, bewildered by the dark principle, had answered in the negative Ṛ. reproached him, as M. ṛ. had formerly declared them to be authentic. Nahuṣa touched Agastyas head with his foot, and instantly lost his power and luck, and was agitated with fear. Then Agastya cursed him Fall thou from heaven, the effect of all thy good deeds has been exhausted for, years thou shalt be a snake upon earth then thou mayst come back to Svarga. M. ṛ P Y Sp Rā G devakanyāḥ, and the bands of Aps and tanks, rivers, mountains, and the sea came and rejoiced . Indra, glorified by G. and Aps mounted Airāvata. Agni, the M. ṛ Bṛhaspati, Yama, Varuṇa, and Kubera accompanied him. Indra went to the three worlds with G and Aps and was praised by Aṅgiras with hymns of the Atharvaveda. Then he granted Atharvāṅgiras the boon that his name would be connected with this Veda and that he would get a share in sacrifices. United with Śacī he protected the world virtuously .
Indriyasarvadehināṃ = Śiva .
Indrota, a brahman, descendant of Śunaka . b, .
. b Bhīṣma said There was, in days of yore, a king Pārikṣit Janamejaya from want of judgment he became guilty of killing a brahman then all the brahmans, with his priests, abaned him burning day and night with regret, the king retired into the woods deserted by his subjects also, and consumed by repentance, he underwent the most rigid austerities. In order to purify himself of the sin of brahmanicide he interrogated many brahmans, and wandered from country to country over the whole earth. One day he met Indrota Śaunaka, who rebuked him for his brahmanicide and reminded him of the messengers of Yama in the abode of Yama . Janamejaya meekly listened to the reproof, saying that he was much afraid of Yama he knew that, according to the Vedas, wretches like himself had forfeited all claim to the respect of the world, and had after death to dwell in hell like Pulindas and Śabaras, and he sought instruction from Indrota, who told him to repent and, knowing the Vedas, etc act in such a way that the brahmans might not be angry with him Śaunaka said that his kinsmen and friends would call him sinful because he instructed Janamejaya. Janamejaya swore never again to injure the brahmans . Indrota discoursed to the repentant king on the means of cleansing himself, quoting a verse sung by Yayāti about the sacredness of Kurukṣetra, etc and recommending him to go to Mahāsaras, etc quoting also a saying of Manu and a verse of Satyavat. Mahāsaras, etc are so sacred that one guilty of fœticide becomes cleansed at even yojanas from them. Manu has said that by diving in water after thrice reciting the Agha marṣaṇa, one reaps the fruits of the final bath in a horse sacrifice. The gods and Asuras in days of yore were instructed by M. ṛ. Bṛhaspati, the preceptor of the gods, how one should cleanse himself from sin. Indrota then assisted Janamejaya, cleansed of his sins, in the horse sacrifice .
Indu = Soma, q.v.
Irā, an Apsaras .
Irā, a goddess . Ilā.
Irāmā, a river .
Irāvat, a son of Arjuna Pāṇḍava . b . was begotten by Arjuna on the daughter of the king of the Nāgas when her husband had been slain by Garuḍa, childless as she was, she was bestowed upon Arjuna by Airāvata. . grew up in the Nāgaloka, protected by his mother, and when his wicked uncle had abaned him from hatred of Arjuna, . went to Indraloka, having heard that Arjuna had gone thither. There he gladdened Arjuna who, dismissing him, told him to render him assistance in the battle, . Arjunasuta, Arjunātmaja, Ārjuni.
Irāvatī, a river, the present Rāvi . b, . Airāvatī
Īrin, pl a family .
Iṣṭa = Viṣṇu .
Iṣṭākṛta, a sacrifice, .
Iṣṭīkṛta, a sacrifice, .
Iṣupa, v. Iṣupad.
Iṣupad, an Asura .
Iṣvastrottamabhartṛ = Śiva, .
itihāsa1, etc etc etc. Jaya1.
Itihāsa2 = Śiva .
Jābāli, a ṛṣi, son of Viśvāmitra . b, .
Jagadādija = Viṣṇu .
Jagadanvaya = Mahāpuruṣa .
Jagadīśvara = Indra, .
Jagannātha1 = Brahmán, .
Jagannātha2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Jagannātha3 = Śiva, .
Jagat = Śiva .
Jagataḥ koṣa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Jagataḥ prabhavāvyaya = Kṛṣṇa, .
Jagataḥ prabhu = Kṛṣṇa, .
Jagataḥ setu = Viṣṇu .
Jagatī . c, . Bhūmi.
Jagatkāla = Śiva .
Jagatpati1 = Brahmán, .
Jagatpati2 = Śiva
Jagatpati3 = Kāma, .
Jagatpati4 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Jagatpati5 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Jagatpati6 = Nahuṣa, .
Jagatprabhu1 = Brahmán, .
Jagatprabhu2 = Viṣṇu, .
Jagatprakṛti = Mahāpuruṣa .
Jaguda, pl a people .
Jāhnavī = Gaṅgā, .
Jāhnavīdhṛk = Śiva .
Jāhnavīputra, Jāhnavīsuta = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Jāhnavīya, adj. .
Jahnu1, an ancient king . b, . b, .
Jahnu2 = Viṣṇu .
Jahnukanyā = Gaṅgā, .
Jahnusutā = Gaṅgā, .
Jaigīṣavya, a muni . ff, .
Jaimini, a ṛṣi, disciple of Vyāsa . b .
Jaitra, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
jaitra, said of various chariots, .
Jājali, a brahman. b, .
Jajñasena, v. Yajñasena.
Jala .
Jalā, a river .
Jāla, a celestial weapon .
Jalacara = Śiva .
Jalada, a mountain in Śākadvīpa. b, = Malaya
Jaladhāra, a mountain in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Jalādhipa = Varuṇa, q.v.
Jalajakusumayoni = Brahmán, . Pad mayoni.
Jalandhama, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Jalapradānika, adj. .
. Janamejaya inquired of Vaiśampāyana as to what Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc did after the death of Duryodhana. Dhṛtarāṣṭras grief Sañjaya comforted him, and suggested the performance of the obsequious rites of the fallen heroes. Dhṛtarāṣṭra lamented Sañjaya rebuked and consoled him . Vidura addressed Dhṛtarāṣṭra and comforted him charmed by Viduras discourse, Dhrtarāṣtra asked him to continue his observations on the vanity of human life Vidura continued his discourse, and described human life as it runs from the very beginning, comparing it to a wilderness abounding with dangers, explaining the comparison according to the religion of Mokṣa asked by Dhṛta rāṣṭra, Vidura continued his discourse on human life . Dhṛtarāṣṭra swooned away, but was comforted by Vyāsa, etc wept and lamented Vyāsa comforted him by explaining the secret history of the slaughter, etc. . Dhṛtarāṣṭra promised to live Vyāsa disappeared . Requested by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related After Duryodhana had been slain, and all the troops slaughtered, Sañjaya, deprived of his spiritual sight, came back to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and recommended him to cause the obsequial rites to be performed. Dhṛtarāṣṭra swooned away Vidura comforted him . Dhṛtarāṣṭra resolved to visit the field of battle with the Kuru ladies in his company. The Kuru ladies were placed in chariots under Viduras supervision the royal household, with a large number of the citizens, started from Hāstinapura . Having proceeded a krośa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra met with Aśvatthā man, etc. . Kṛpa related to Gāndhārī the fall of Duryo dhana in unfair fight, and their nightly attack on the camp of the Pāṇḍavas then Aśvatthāman, etc took leave of Dhṛtarāṣṭra in order to conceal themselves from the wrath of the Pāṇḍavas, and urged their steeds to wards the banks of the Gaṅgā, where they separated from one another Kṛpa went to Hāstinapura Kṛtavarman to his own king Aśvatthā man set out for the abode of Vyāsa before the sun rose it was after this that the sons of Pāṇḍu encountered Aśvatthāman and vanquished him . Yudhiṣṭhira and his brothers set out in order to meet Dhṛtarāṣṭra, accompanied by Kṛṣṇa, etc. they met the weeping ladies of the royal house on the way, and saluted Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who reluctantly embraced Yudhiṣṭhira, and broke an iron statue of Bhīma, mistaking it for Bhīma himself he then grieved for having slain Bhīma, fell n, and was raised by his charioteer Sañjaya Kṛṣṇa enlightened him, and told him not to cherish wrath . Certain maid servants came and washed Dhṛtarāṣṭra then Kṛṣṇa again addressed him, assuring him that the Pāṇḍavas were perfectly innocent then Dhṛtarāṣṭra embraced Bhīma, etc. . Commanded by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the Pāṇḍava brothers with Kṛṣṇa then proceeded to see Gān dhārī, who wished to curse Yudhiṣṭhira. The great Ṛ. Vyāsa, capable of proceeding everywhere with the fleetness of the wind, and capable of seeing the heart of every creature with his spiritual vision, understood her evil intentions, and having cleansed himself by the water of the Gaṅgā, he suddenly appeared, and told her not to be angry with the Pāṇḍavas, but remember that she had every day for the eighteen days that battle lasted, when Duryodhana asked her to bless him, said Thither goes victory where righteousness is. Gāndhārī admitted that she and Dhṛtarāṣṭra should protect the Pāṇḍavas with as much care as Kuntī herself protected them, the fault being with Duryodhana, etc. but Bhīmas unfair combat with Duryodhana in the presence of Kṛṣṇa moved her wrath . Bhīma addressed Gāndhārī, and extenuated his fault in having slain Duryodhana unfairly . Gāndhārī then blamed Bhīma for drinking Duḥśāsanas blood, when Vṛṣasena had deprived Nakula of his steeds Bhīma denied that he had really drunk Duḥśāsanas blood Karṇa knew this well seeing Nakula deprived by Vṛṣasena of his steeds, caused the rejoicing brothers to be filled with dread when the tresses of Draupadī were seized, uttered certain words in rage dared not leave that vow unaccomplished lest should be regarded as having swerved from the duties of a kṣatriya. Gāndhārī then inquired after Yudhiṣṭhira, who appeared before her and invoked her curses on himself for his sinful slaughter of all her sons Gāndhārīs glance blasted a nail of Yudhiṣṭhiras toe. Arjuna moved away to the seat of Kṛṣṇa, and also the other Pāṇḍavas became restless. Gāndhārī then comforted the Pāṇḍavas and dismissed them. They then met with their mother Kuntī, who wept seeing their many sears. Draupadī wept for her children and Abhimanyu Kuntī consoled her, and so did Gāndhārī .
Jalasandha1, a Magadha king . Māgadha.
Jalasandha2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Jaleśaya = Śiva .
Jaleśvara1 = Varuṇa, q.v.
Jaleśvara2 = Śiva .
Jalelā, a mātṛ. u, .
Jaleyu, a son of Raudrāśva .
Jalodbhava = Śiva .
Jālya = Śiva .
Jamadagni, a ṛṣi, the son of Ṛcīka and Satyavatī and the father of Rāma1 . At this time, while Gādhi, the king of Kānyakubja, was dwelling in the wood, there was born to him a beautiful daughter, Satyavatī, whom Ṛcīka Bhārgava asked in marriage. Gādhi said that, according to a family custom, the bridegroom must give a ry of, brown steeds with a single sable ear each . Ṛcīka obtained them from Varuṇa and married Satyavatī in Kānyakubja on the Gaṅgā, the very gods being companions of the bridegroom . Then his father Bhṛgu came to see him and his wife, and being pleased with Satyavatī, granted her the boon that a son should be born to herself and to her mother, telling her that during their season they should embrace, her mother an aśvattha tree and herself an udumbara tree, and eat two pots of rice and milk which he had prepared, having ransacked the whole universe. Then Bhṛgu disappeared. They, however, made an interchange both of the pots and of the trees which they embraced. Knowing this by his divine knowledge, Bhṛgu came once more and told Satyavatī that she had been deluded by her mother, and that therefore she would give birth to a brahman of kṣatriya character and her mother to a kṣatriya of brahman character . At her repeated entreaties, however, he granted her that not her son but her grandson should be of that description. The son of Satyavatī was J who excelled many ṛṣis in Vedic lore, and to whom the whole Dhanurveda appeared spontaneously, and likewise the four kinds of weapon, . J. devoted himself to the study of the Veda and to penances. He married Reṇukā, the daughter of king Prasenajit, and lived with her in his hermitage practising austerities. She gave birth to five sons, of whom Rāma was the youngest. Once when Reṇukā had been filled with desire, seeing the Mārttikāvata king Citraratha bathing, together with his wife, J. ordered his sons Rumaṇvat the eldestAnūpapatiḥDroṇavadhap.Paraśu RāmaBhārga vānāṃ kule jātaḥ, father of Paraśu RāmaRāmop.Page3 b Bhārgavaṃ, son of Ṛcīka and Satyavatīfather of Rāmadhenvāḥ...vatsaṃslain by the sons of Arjuna Kārtavīrya Mokṣadh.Ṛcīkasya putraḥ, one of the ṛṣis of the northhad praised ViṣṇuViśvāmitrop.his birth Rāmahradagatiṃ labhet, sc. by bathing in MahāhradaCyavana Kuśikasaṃv.Bhṛguśārdūlaḥ, Ṛcīka will beget J who will master the DhanurvedaBisastainyop.etymology of his nameŚapatha vidhiChattropāna hotpattieś ca saṃvādaṃ Sūryasya caterrifies the Sun, who in order to pacify him gives him an umbrella and a pair of sandalsĀnuśāsanik.among the ṛṣis who have attained to heaven through observance of fastsṚcīkatanayaḥ, one of the gurus of Dhaneśvara in the northṚcīkaputraḥ, one of the ṛṣis of the northArjuna Kārtavīryafather of RāmaNakulākhyānaanger
Jāmadagni, a ṛṣi .
Jamadagnisuta = Rāma1, .
Jāmadagnya1 = Rāma1, q.v.
Jāmadagnya2 = Rumaṇvat, .
Jāmadagnyam upākhyāna .
Jāmbavat, the king of the bears .
Jāmbavatī, wife of Kṛṣṇa and mother of Śāmba . Kapīndraputrī.
Jāmbavatīsuta = Śāmba, .
Jāmbavatyāḥ suta = Śāmba, .
Jambha1, an Asura . c, . c, . d, . Asura.
Jambha2, a Rākṣasa .
Jambhaka, a prince. b The son of J. lived on the banks of Carmaṇvatī, and had been spared by Vāsudeva in their former hostilities, .
Jambū. i On the south of Nīla and the north of Niṣadha there is a huge eternal jambū tree, named Sudarśana, and aed by Si, and Cā. it grants every wish, and after it Jambūdvīpa has its name the tree is, yojanas high and touches the very heavens. The circumference of a fruit of that tree measures, cubits when ripe the fruit bursts, and pours out a silvery juice which becomes a river, which passes round Meru and comes to the northern Kurus the drinking of that juice conduces to peace of mind, no thirst is felt ever after, nor decrepitude. On that spot there is found a species of gold, called jāmbūnada, used for celestial ornaments and like the complexion of indragopaka insects. The men who live there are of the complexion of the morning sun, . e, .
Jambūdvīpa, name of the dvīpa south of Meru, and also of the whole circular central dvīpa . i, . b, . Jambūkhaṇḍa, Jambuparvata.
Jambuka1, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Jambuka2, v. Śambuka.
Jambūka, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Jambūkhaṇḍa = Jambūdvīpa, . next.
Jambūkhaṇḍavinirmāṇa .
. Janamejaya inquired how the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas and Somakas fought on Kurukṣetra. Vaiśampāyana began the description of the battle. The Pāṇḍavas occupied the western part, turned towards the east, beyond Samantapañcaka. The force was collected from the whole of Jambudvīpa. Yudhi ṣṭhira and Duryodhana fixed watchwords. Seeing Duryo dhana, the Pāñcālas were filled with joy, and blew their conches, etc. Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa also blew their conches Devadatta and Pāñcajanya, at which the Kurus were alarmed. Various ill omens were beheld. Both parties settled rules and made covenants regarding the different kinds of combat . Vyāsa visited Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and offered to grant him spiritual vision that he might witness the battle. Dhṛtarāṣṭra did not like to see the slaughter of his kinsmen. Vyāsa then granted it to Sañjaya, that he might narrate everything to Dhṛtarāṣṭra weapons would not hurt him he would come out of the battle with life. Vyāsa informed Dhṛtarāṣṭra of the omens, and appealed to him for peace but Dhṛtarāṣṭra urged the disobedience of his sons. Vyāsa enumerated to Dhṛtarāṣṭra the omens that indicate victory, and recommended negotiation, as victory was uncertain . Then Vyāsa departed. Seeing the many hundreds of millions of men that had come together at Kurujāṅgala to lay n their very lives for the sake of the earth, Dhṛtarā ṣṭra inquired of Sañjaya after the attributes of Earth, and the details about the countries and cities from which they had come. Sañjaya discoursed on the merits of the earth, and the various classes of creatures inhabiting it. Their twenty four constituents are described as Gāyatrī . Dhṛtarāṣṭra inquired about the rivers, mountains, and provinces of the earth, and their dimensions. Sañjaya spoke of the five elements and their attributes, earth being the foremost. Then he began the description of the dvīpa of Sudarśana . Sañjaya discoursed on the six mountains that extend from the eastern to the western ocean, and are the resort of Si. and Cā. Himavat etc and the varṣas between them Bhārata varṣa, etc. Mālyavat, Gandhamādana Meru the four islands beside Meru Bhadrāśva, etc. the bird Sumukha on Meru sport G As Rā and Aps and Brahmán, Rudra, and Śakra perform sacrifices Tumburu, etc ae the gods with hymns the seven Ṛṣis and Kaśyapa repair thither on every parvan day upon the summit is Uśanas with the Daityas the jewels, etc come from Meru, one fourth part being enjoyed by Kubera, who gives only one sixteenth to men. On the northern side of Meru is a forest of karṇi kāras there Paśupati, together with his celestial attendants and Umā, sports, bearing a chain of karṇikāra flowers reaching n to his feet, and his three eyes resembling three suns the Siddhas can behold him, but not persons of wicked conduct from the summit of that mountain Gaṅgā falls n. On the western side of Meru is Ketumāla, and also Jambūkhaṇḍa, Gandhamādana . The last varṣa in the north and Bharatas varṣa in the south are both of the form of a bow. Amongst these seven varṣas that which is further north excels the one to its immediate south in respect of longevity, stature, health, righteousness, pleasure, and profit. The huge mountains of Hemakūṭa are also called Kailāsa, where Vaiśravaṇa lives in joy with Gh. To the north of Kailāsa and near the mountains of Maināka there is the huge and beautiful mountain Hiraṇyaśṛṅga. Beside this the delightful lake Bindusaras, with golden sands. Rā. reside on Himavat, etc. . The two dvīpas Nāgadvīpa and Kaśyapadvīpa are the two ears of this hare shaped region the beautiful mountains of Malaya, having rocks like copper plates, form another part of Jambūdvīpa, making it resemble a hare . Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sañjaya about the regions to the north and the east side of Meru, and about the mountains of Mālyavat. Sañjaya told about the Uttarakurus . East of Meru the foremost region is Bhadrāśva . The jambū tree . Mālyavat . Dhṛtarāṣṭra inquired about the names of all the varṣas and mountains. Sañjaya related of Ramaṇaka, etc. . Dhṛtarāṣṭra became absorbed in meditation about his sons then he said Time destroys and creates everything Nara and Nārāyaṇa, omniscient, destroying all creatures, the gods call him Vaikuṇṭha, men call him Viṣṇu . Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked about Bhārata varṣa, about which Duryodhana and the Pāṇḍavas are so covetous. Sañjaya said that the Pāṇḍavas were not covetous about it, but Duryodhana, Śakuni, etc. then he mentioned in Bhārata varṣa, the beloved land of Indra, etc inhabited by Aryans and Mlecchas, the mountains Mahendra, etc. rivers Gaṅgā, etc. countries Kuru Pāñcālāḥ, etc. and countries in the south Draviḍāḥ, etc. the tribes of the north Mlecchāḥ, etc. and in the east and the north Śūdrābhīrāḥ, etc. . Dhṛtarāṣṭra inquired about life, strength, etc in Bhārata varṣa, and of Haimavata varṣa and Harivarṣa. Sañjaya related of the four yugas Kṛta, etc. . The portion that remains of the Dvāpara age is small. Haimavata varṣa is superior to Bhārata varṣa, and Harivarṣa superior to Haimavata varṣa, in every respect .
Jambūmārga, a tīrtha . w, .
Jāmbūnada, son of the elder Janamejaya. .
Jāmbūnada saras, a lake .
Jāmbūnadaparvata, a mountain .
Jambūnadī, a river. f, .
Jāmbūnadī, a river .
Jambuparvata .
Janadeva, v. Janaka.
Janajanmādi = Viṣṇu .
Janaka, one or more Videha kings in Mithilā . b, . b, . b, . f The brahman said King J who was desirous of punishing a brahman for an offence, forbade him to dwell within his inions. The brahman then asked him about the limits of his territories J.s understanding at first became clouded, then he said that he failed to find his inion in the king, in Mithilā, and among his own children even this body is not mine, or the whole earth is mine, and as much mine as it is of others remain as long as you please. Asked by the brahman, he explained how he had come to this result, and got rid of the idea of mine all my acts are for the sake of the gods, P Bh and the guests. The brahman turned out to be Dharma, who described himself as emancipated, and said that J. would enter his soul, . also the following synonyms Aindradyumni, . Daivarāti, . Dharmadhvaja, . Karāla, Karālajanaka, q.v. Maithila, . Mithilādhipa, . Mithilādhipati, . Mithileśvara, . Vaideha, Videharāja. q.v.
Janaka, pl the family of Janaka .
Janakanṛpa, Janakarāja, v. Janaka.
Janakātmaja = Vasumat, .
Janakātmajā = Sītā, q.v.
Janakendra, v. Janaka.
Jānaki, a prince .
Jānakī = Sītā, q.v.
Janamejaya1, son of Parikṣit and Mādravatī, and the husband of Vapuṣṭamā at his snake sacrifice Vaiśampāyana recited the Mhbhr. for the first time . J the minor son of Parikṣit, is made king and married to Vapuṣṭamā, the daughter of the Kāśi king Suvarṇavarman, . The menial of a brahman who gathered sacrificial fuel in the banyan tree, which was burnt by Takṣaka and revived by Kāśyapa, was equally burnt to ashes and revived, and had told to the ministers of J. what had happened between Takṣaka and Kāśyapa. J. resolved to avenge his father and Uttaṅka, . As there was a snake sacrifice read of in the Purāṇa, J. caused the preparations for such a sacrifice to be made. When the sacrificial platform was being constructed, the Sūta Lohitākṣa, versed in the rules of building, announced that both the soil and the time of the sacrifice foreboded that a brahman would come to prevent the completion of the sacrifice. J. therefore gave orders not to admit anybody with out his knowledge . b, . b, . b Sauti said Hearing this, at the intervals of the sacrificial rites, king J. became filled with wonder. The sacrificial priests finished the rites. Āstīka, having rescued the snakes, became filled with joy. J. gratified all the brahmans with copious presents, then they returned home. J. came back from Takṣaśilā to Hāstinapura, . also the following synonyms Bhārata, Bharataśārdūla, Bharataśreṣtha, Bhāratāgrya, Bharatarṣabha, Bharatasat tama, q.v. Kaurava, Kauravaśārdūla, Kauravanandana, Kauravendra, Kauravya, q.v. Kuruśārdūla, Kuruśreṣṭha, Kurūdvaha, Kurukulaśreṣṭha, Kurukulodvaha, Kuru nandana, Kurupravīra, Kurupuṅgavāgraja, Kurusattama, q.v. Pāṇḍava, Pāṇḍavanandana, Pāṇḍaveya, q.v. Pārikṣita, . Paurava, q.v.
Janamejaya2, one or more ancient kings. bis . The passages quoted here might as well refer to one of the princes mentioned under the headings Janamejaya4 .
Janamejaya3, a prince, contemporary of the great war .
Janamejaya4, son of Kuru .
Janamejaya5, son of the elder Parikṣit . .
Janamejaya6, son of Pūru .
Janamejaya7, a king of the Nīpas .
Janamejaya8, one or more Pāñcāla princes in the army of Yudhiṣṭhira . Pāñcālya.
Janamejaya9, king of the mountaineers .
Janamejaya1, Pārikṣit. b, .
Janamejaya, pl. .
Janana = Viṣṇu .
Jānapadī, an Apsaras .
Janārdana = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Janārdana, pl. .
Jānārdani = Pra dyumna, .
Janasthāna, name of a place . k, . l, .
Janeśvara = Viṣṇu .
Jāṅgala, pl a people . Kurujāṅgala, pl.
Jaṅgama = Śiva .
Jaṅghābandhu, a muni .
Jaṅghāri, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Janmamṛtyujarātiga = Viṣṇu .
Jantu, son of king Somaka .
Jantūpākhyāna . Questioned by Yudhiṣṭhira, Lomaśa said King Somaka had wives, but was a long time sonless. At last, when he and his wives were old, he got a son Jantu, whom all the wives surrounded with the utmost care. One day when Jantu had been stung by an ant at his hip and cried, Somaka, afraid of losing him, inquired of his ṛtvij if there were a ceremony by which a man might get sons. He was told to sacrifice Jantu and let his wives take a smell of the smoke of his fat then sons would be born to him, and Jantu himself would be born once more of the same mother, with a mark of gold on his back . The sacrifice was performed notwithstanding the screams of the wives, and after ten months sons were born, of whom Jantu was the eldest and most beloved and superior in merit, and had that mark of gold. When the guru and Somaka had died, the purohita was grilled in a terrible hell for having performed that sacrifice, and Somaka prevailed upon Dharmarāja that he should be likewise tormented for the same period before he entered the blessed regions. Here they spent six nights .
Jānujaṅgha, an ancient king .
Janya = Śiva .
. b A brahman, who was a reciter, conversant with the six Aṅgas, of the Kuśika race and son of Pippalāda, acquired spiritual insight into the Aṅgas at the foot of Himavat he was devoted to the Vedas silently reciting Gāyatrī, he practised austerities for, years in order to attain to Bráhman. Then Gāyatrī appeared and granted him the boon that his wish for recitation should go on increasing, and his absorption into meditation be more complete. She added that he should not have to go to hell, thither where great brahmans go, but to the region of Brahmán, and that Dharma, etc would come to him in person. He continued engaged in recitation for, celestial years. Then Dharma came to him and told him to cast off his body in order to win regions of bliss but he did not wish to reside in heaven except with his body, but only took pleasure in recitation. Time, Mṛtyu, and Yama came and told him the same. The brahman gave them arghya and pādya. Ikṣvāku, who had set out on a tīrtha yātrā, came and was given arghya and pādya. The brahman wished to give him something Ikṣvāku, as a kṣatriya, would not take anything except battle, but only himself give at last, however, he asked to be allowed to enjoy the fruits of the brahmans recitations, but when the brahman consented he would not take them, and asked the brahman what those fruits were. The brahman did not know, as his recitations had never been connected with any special purpose he told the king that Truth required that he should take them as he had asked for them . Dharma and Heaven seconded the brahman. Ikṣvāku wished to give his own merits instead, but in vain then Ikṣvāku agreed to accept half the brahmans merit on the condition that the brahman should take half of his own, but he was refused. At this time two ungainly individuals came there, Virūpa and Vikṛta Virūpa said that he owed Vikṛta the merits of the gift of a cow, but that Vikṛta refused to take repayment Vikṛta declared that Virūpa owed him nothing they asked Ikṣvāku to decide the question. Ikṣvāku hesitated the brahman threatened to curse him. Ikṣvāku would give him some drops of water that had fallen upon his hand. Virūpa approved of this arrangement, and said that Vikṛta really did not owe him anything we appealed to thee for thy own sake. Bhīṣma said that a reciter goes to Brahmán, or Agni, or Sūrya. whose attributes he catches stupefied by attachment and so also if he goes to Soma, etc. if, however, he goes to, those regions after having freed himself from attachment, he enters the Supreme and Imperishable, and becomes Bráhman . The brahman accepted, worshipped Dharma, etc and set himself to his recitations again. Asked by Ikṣvāku, he agreed that he should go half and half with the king. Indra came there with Lp Sā Vi etc and said to the brahman and the king that they had attained to success . Those two withdrew their senses from the objects of the world fixing Praṇa, etc in the heart, they concentrated the mind in Prāṇa and Apāna united together, etc. . Brahmán welcomed the fiery flame that had issued from the head of the brahman, saying Reciters attain to the same end as the yogins but as regards reciters, the honour is ordained for them that Brahmán himself shall advance to receive them then he once more imparted consciousness into that splenr the brahman then entered the mouth of Brahmán, and so did the king. The deities rejoiced. Brahmán said that so also would he that reads the great Smṛti and the Anusmṛti in this way attain to the same region with Brahmán and so also he who is devoted to Yoga. Then Brahmán disappeared, and the deities, having honoured Dharma, returned to their respective abodes .
Jarā, a female Rākṣasa . Gṛhadevī, Rākṣasī.
Jaras, the hunter who wounded Kṛṣṇa .
Jarāsandha1, king of the Māgadhas, son of Bṛhadratha . b, . b, . b, . Bārhadratha, Māgadha, Magadhādhipa, Magadhādhipati, Magadheśvara.
Jarāsandha2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Jarāsandhasuta . Jārāsandhi.
Jarāsandhasutā .
Jarasandhātmaja = Sahadeva, . Jārāsandhi.
Jarāsandhavadha .
. As Kṛṣṇa thought that Jarāsandha was incapable of being vanquished in battle even by all the gods and Asuras, but might be vanquished in a personal struggle with bare arms, and as there was in himself policy, in Bhīma strength, and in Arjuna ability to protect them, he thought that Jarāsandha should be made to challenge Bhīma, and Kṛṣṇa therefore obtained the permission of Yudhiṣṭhira that Bhīma and Arjuna followed him. They set out in the garb of snātakas, with Bhīma in the van, from the land of the Kurus to the Padmasaras, over Kālakūṭa, Gaṇḍakī, Mahāśoṇa, Sadānīrā, the rivers on the Ekaparvataka and Pūrvā Kośalā, Mithilā, Mālā, Carmaṇvatī, Gaṅgā, Śoṇa, towards the east, dressed in garments of kuśa grass, to the Māgadha land. When they came to the mountain of Goratha, they beheld the Māgadha town . Girivraja is surrounded by the five large hills of Vaihāra, Varāha, Vṛṣabha, Ṛṣigiri, and Caityaka. It was there that Gautama begat Kākṣīvat, etc upon the śūdra woman Auśīnarī, and was visited by the kings of Aṅga, Vaṅga, etc. There dwell the Nāgas Arbuda, Śakravāpin, Svastika, and Maṇināga. Manu had ordered the Māgadhas never to be afflicted with drought Kauśika and Maṇimat had favoured the country. The Pāṇḍavas and Kṛṣṇa entered the city by breaking n the peak of Caityaka, worshipped by the Bārhadrathas and the citizens with perfumes and flower garlands, where Bṛhadratha had slain the cannibal Ṛṣabha, and made of his hide three drums . As evil omens had been seen, the purohitas made Jarāsandha mount an elephant and carried fire about him, and he entered upon a sacrifice with vows and fasts . Kṛṣṇa, Bhīma, and Dhanañjaya entered the city without weapons in the guise of snātakas, snatched from the flower vens the garlands they had exposed for sale, and attired in robes of various colours and decked with garlands and ear rings they entered the abode of Jarāsandha, who welcomed them, and hearing from Kṛṣṇa that Bhīma and Arjuna in consequence of a vow would not speak before night, quartered them in the sacrificial apartments and retired to the palace . At midnight he came to them, as he always observed the vow, that as soon as he should hear of the arrival of snātakas, even at midnight, he would immediately come out and grant them an audience. As he questioned them about their strange attire, which was unsuitable for snātakas, and their breaking n the Caityaka peak, and why they would not accept the worship he offered, Kṛṣṇa gave him some explanations, and declared that they had come as his foes . As Jarāsandha said that he did not remember to have injured them, Kṛṣṇa told him that they were sent by Yudhiṣṭhira to set at liberty the princes whom Jarāsandha intended to slaughter as a sacrifice to Śiva, because sacrificing human beings to the gods was never used he reminded him of the destruction of Dambhodbhava, Kārta vīrya, Uttara, and Bṛhadratha, and challenged him to set free the monarchs or to fight. Jarāsandha chose to fight, and ordered Sahadeva, to be installed on the throne. Then he thought of his generals Kauśika and Citrasena, who had formerly been Haṃsa and Ḍimbhaka. Kṛṣṇa, remembering that, according to the command of Brahmán, Jarāsandha was not to be slain by him or by the Madhus, did not himself desire to slay him . Jarāsandha having chosen to fight with Bhīma, the purohita brought pigment, garlands, etc and propitiatory ceremonies were performed by a brahman and likewise Bhīma, having consulted with Kṛṣṇa, had propitiatory ceremonies pronounced . When Jarāsandha had taken off his crown and arranged his hair, they fought with their clenched fists as their only weapons. The combat began at the first day of the month Kārttika, and lasted, without intermission or food, till the thirteenth on the fourteenth night Jarāsandha desisted from fatigue, and Kṛṣṇa obscurely intimated that he should now be killed . At the instigation of Kṛṣṇa, Bhīma threw Jarāsandha into the air a hundred times, pressed his knee against his backbone and broke his body in two with a terrible roar, so that the citizens became dumb with terror and many women were prematurely delivered. Leaving the lifeless body at the palace gate, they went out of the town riding on Jarāsandhas celestial chariot, which Kṛṣṇa caused to be made ready, it being aned with a celestial flagstaff and incapable of being vanquished by any king, upon which Indra and Viṣṇu had fought in the battle about Tārakā, riding upon which Indra had slain ninety nine Dānavas, which had been obtained by king Vasu from Vāsava, from Vasu by Bṛhadratha, and from him by Jarāsandha. And Kṛṣṇa thought of Garuḍa, who sat upon the chariot along with the frightfully roaring creatures on its flagstaff. Kṛṣṇa then released his relatives and ordered them to assist Yudhiṣṭhira at his rājasūya. Stopping on a level plain outside the town, he was aed by the citizens, and he installed Sahadeva, the son of Jarāsandha, in the sovereignty of the Magadhas. Then they arrived at Indra prastha. Thereupon Kṛṣṇa, having taken leave of Yudhi ṣṭhira, etc set out for his own city, riding upon that same celestial chariot that had been given to him by Yudhiṣṭhira, the Pāṇḍavas having circumambulated him
Jārāsandhi = Sahadeva or Jayatsena . Jarāsandhasuta, Jarāsandhātmaja.
Jaratkāru1, a ṛṣi, husband of Jaratkāru and father of Āstīka. Sauti said The ascetic J when going about and practising religious austerities, one day saw his ancestors, the Yāyāvaras, hanging, heads n, in a great hole by a rope of vīraṇa fibres, which was eaten into on all sides by a rat he was told that it was because he had no offspring. He then promised to marry, if he might get a wife of the same name as his own, and who would be given to him in charity . At last he married Jaratkāru, the sister of Vāsuki, the king of serpents, who intended by this marriage to neutralize the curse inflicted on the serpents by their mother . Having begotten Āstīka, J. ascended to heaven together with his ancestors, . Etymology of the name J . The story of J. repeated and somewhat enlarged, . One day. J sleeping on the lap of his wife when the sun was setting, was awakened by her, lest the twilight should pass away without his prayers being said. J. felt insulted, as he believed that the sun had no power to set in the usual time if he was asleep. He therefore left her and again began to practise austerities, .
Jaratkāru2, sister of Vāsuki, the king of serpents, wife of Jaratkāru, and mother of Āstīka .
Jaratkārusuta = Āstīka, .
Jarāyu, a matṛ. u, .
Jarāyujāḥ = Śiva .
Jaritā, a śārṅgikā, wife of Mandapāla .
Jaritāri, the eldest son of Mandapāla and Jaritā .
Jarjarānanā, a mātṛ. u, .
Jartika, pl a tribe of the Bāhīkas .
Jārūthī . b, .
Jaṭādhara1, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Jaṭādhara2 = Śiva, .
Jaṭālikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Jaṭāsura1, a Rākṣasa . Rakṣas, Rākṣasa.
Jaṭāsura2, a prince .
Jaṭāsurasuta = Alambuṣa, .
Jaṭāsuravadha .
. One after the Rākṣasas with Ghaṭotkaca had departed, while Bhīma was a hunting, and Lomaśa and the other ṛṣis had gone away to bathe and collect flowers, the Rākṣasa Jaṭāsura, who had followed Yudhiṣṭhira in the guise of a brahman versed in all the śāstras, with the object of possessing himself of the arms of the Pāṇḍavas and of Draupadī, began to flee away with the arms and Draupadī and the three Pāṇḍavas. Sahadeva extricated himself, and snatching the sword Kauśika, he began to call Bhīmasena. Yudhiṣṭhira reproached him, saying that the Rākṣasas are the root of virtue and know virtue best, and that the Rākṣasas, gods, Pitṛs, Siddhas, Ṛṣis, Gandharvas, etc depend for their lives on men, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira then made himself ponderous. Sahadeva was about to attack the Rākṣasa, when Bhīma appeared mace in hand. The Rākṣasa set them n, and he and Bhīma began to fight with trees, like Vālin and Sugrīva, and then with rocks, and at last by wrestling, till Bhīma, having dealt a blow on the neck of the Rākṣasa, lifted him up, and dashed him on the ground and severed his head from his body, and then presented himself before Yudhiṣṭhira .
Jāṭāsuri = Alambuṣa, .
Jātavedas = Agni, q.v.
Jātavedasī = Durgā, .
Jaṭāyu, a vulture, brother of Sampāti .
Jaṭhara, pl. .
Jāṭhara1, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Jāṭhara2 = Sūrya, .
Jaṭila = Śiva, q.v. .
Jaṭilā, a female descendant of Gotama . Gautamī.
Jaṭin1 = Śiva, q.v.
Jaṭin2, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Jātismara, a tīrtha .
Jātismarahrada, a tīrtha .
. Vaiśampāyana briefly related the plan of Saubala, Duryodhana, Duḥśāsana, Karṇa, and Dhṛta rāṣṭra to burn the Pāṇḍavas and Kuntī in a lac house, and their escape. Asked by Janamejaya, he then began to relate it more fully. The Pāṇḍavas frustrated all the plans of murdering them laid by Duryodhana, etc without speaking of them, in obedience to the counsels of Vidura. People began to speak in all public places of installing Yudhiṣṭhira on the throne instead of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Duryodhana repre sented to Dhṛtarāṣṭra that this would for ever exclude himself and his brothers from the throne . Duryo dhana, Karṇa, Śakuni, and Duḥśāsana held a consultation together, and Duryodhana prevailed upon Dhṛtarāṣṭra to exile the Pāṇḍavas to Vāraṇāvata . Duryodhana and his brothers began gradually to win over the people to their side by grants of wealth and honours, while Dhṛtarāṣṭra suggested to the Pāṇḍavas to visit the festival of Paśupati at Vāraṇāvata. Fully understanding the motives of Dhṛtarāṣtra, Yudhiṣṭhira let Bhīṣma, Vidura, Droṇa, Bāhlīka, Somadatta, Kṛpa, Aśvatthāman, Bhūriśravas, Gāndhārī, etc give them their benedictions, and the Pāṇḍavas having performed propitiatory rites in order to obtain the king, set out for Vāraṇāvata . Duryodhana prevailed upon Purocana to reach Vāraṇāvata that very day upon a swift chariot, and to construct a house of inflammable materials and burn the Pāṇḍavas and Kuntī . The people, who were distressed by the departure of the Pāṇḍavas, and angry with Dhṛtarāṣṭra, were calmed by Yudhiṣṭhira. Vidura, in obscure words, warned Yudhiṣṭhira, who explained the meaning to Kuntī. They set out on the day of the month of Phālguna when Rohiṇī was ascendant . They were received with great honours by the citizens of Vāraṇāvata and installed by Purocana first in a palace that had been built for them, and after ten days in the lac house called Śiva . Yudhiṣṭhira scented the smell of fat, etc and told it to Bhīma, but resolved to seem unsuspicious . A miner, sent by Vidura, told Yudhiṣṭhira that Purocana would put fire to the house on the fourteenth night of the dark lunation, and made a large subterranean passage . They lived there for a year. Then on a certain night Kuntī fed a large number of brahmans and there came also a Niṣāda woman with her five sons, who became intoxicated and lay n in the house to sleep. The Pāṇḍavas then set fire to the house and burnt Purocana and the Niṣādas, while they themselves escaped through the subterranean passage and fled in haste, Bhīma carrying his mother and brothers . The citizens thought they had been burnt to death . A person sent by Vidura took the Pāṇḍavas and Kuntī to the other side of the Gaṅgā in a boat . The miner had covered the hole he had dug with ashes, and the towns people thought that the Niṣāda woman with her five sons were Kuntī and the Pāṇḍavas, and sent to Dhṛtarāṣṭra to inform him that they had been burnt to death together with Purocana. Dhṛtarāṣṭra wept in deep sorrow, and caused the funeral rites to be performed. Meanwhile the Pāṇḍavas having crossed the Gaṅgā proceeded in the darkness to the south and reached a dense forest. Yudhiṣṭhira then prevailed upon Bhīma to carry Kuntī and his brothers . The motion of Bhīmas legs raised a wind like that of the months of Śuci and Śukra, while he trod n the trees and swam across streams. Towards evening they sat n in a terrible forest under a banyan tree. Kuntī was thirsty, and Bhīma proceeded to a pool at a distance of a gavyūti, and brought water by soaking his upper garments. When he found them sleeping from fatigue, he lamented that Yudhiṣṭhira would not yet allow him to slay Duryodhana, etc and sat there awake keeping watch over them .
Jātūkarṇa, a ṛṣi .
Jatuveśmākhya .
Jāvāli, v. Jābāli.
Javana, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Jaya1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, or an adherent of Duryodhana .
Jaya2, a god . Jayanta.
Jaya3, an ancient king .
Jaya4 = Sūrya, .
Jaya5 = Arjuna, q.v.
Jaya6 .
Jaya7, a serpent . u, .
Jaya8, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Jaya9, a Pāñcāla prince .
Jaya1 . u, .
Jaya1 = Śiva .
Jaya1 = Viṣṇu .
Jaya1, name of a muhūrta .
Jaya1, said of the Mhbhr . also the intro ductory śloka of the single books, and, . Do said of the episode Vidulāputrānuśāsana, .
Jayā = Durgā, .
Jayāśva, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Jayadbala, .
Jayadharman, a Kuru warrior .
Jayadratha1, king of the Sindhus, son of Vṛddhakṣatra . .
Jayadratha2, an ancient king .
Jayadrathavadha .
. Dhṛtarāṣṭra lamented the slaughter of his troops formerly in the abode of Somadatta, who was devoted to truth, used to hear delightful sounds then he mentioned Kṛṣṇas ambassaship, the match at dice, that he and Vidura, etc. did not approve of possessed of sovereignty, the Pāṇḍavas will ever listen to the voice of Śalya, etc. none can fight Bhīmasena, etc. only Duryodhana, etc would venture to resist them he asked what the principal leaders did . Sañjaya rebuked Dhṛtarāṣṭra for his folly in bringing about the battle . Droṇa arrayed his divisions. The warriors shouted in anger where is Arjuna etc. . Droṇa assured Jayadratha of protection. by Somadattas son, etc. . Droṇas array was in part a śakaṭa and in part a circle, miles long, and the width of its rear was miles in the rear was another impenetrable array in the form of a lotus and within that a needle, in the mouth of the needle was Kṛtavarman next came the Kāmboja king, etc. behind them all was Jayadratha at one side of the needle. At the head of the śakaṭa was Droṇa . Si. and Cā. wondered. Duryodhana rejoiced . After the Rudra hour had set in Arjuna made his appearance, while portents appeared in nature. Then Nakulas son Śatānīka and Dhṛṣṭadyumna arrayed the divisions of the Pāṇḍavas. Durmarṣaṇa took up his position in the van in order to oppose Arjuna Arjuna was at the very van of his army. Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna blew their conches. The Kuru army was afraid . THE FOURTEENTH DAYS BATTLR. Arjuna Durmarṣaṇa a terrible carnage was caused by Arjuna Durmarṣaṇas division fled away . Duḥśāsana Arjuna Duḥśā sanas division was slaughtered and routed he sought protection with Droṇa . Arjuna met with Droṇa and prayed for leave to slay Jayadratha Droṇa refused leave and attacked Arjuna unable to vanquish Droṇa, Arjuna avoided him from fear of losing time, and penetrated into the Kuru army, the Pāñcāla princes, Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujas, being the protectors of his wheels Jaya, etc opposed Arjuna, and so did the Abhīṣāhas, etc with Droṇa at their head . Droṇa Arjuna, who employed the Brāhma weapon. Arjuna avoided Droṇa, began to slaughter the Bhojas, and took up his position between Kṛtavarman and the Kāmboja king Sudakṣiṇa. Arjuna Kṛtavarman, who was stupefied Arjuna proceeded to the division of the Kāmbojas. Kṛta varman Yudhāmanyu Uttamaujas, who were prevented by Kṛtavarman from following Arjuna, who did not slay Kṛta varman. Śrutāyudha Arjuna Śrutāyudha attacked Kṛṣṇa with his mace, which returned and slew Śrutāyudha himself all the troops fled away. The Kāmboja king Sudakṣiṇa Arjuna, who slew him all the troops fled away . Arjuna slew the Abhīṣāhas, etc. . Śrutāyus Acyutāyus Arjuna, who slew them both with the Aindra weapon. Niyatāyus Dīrghāyus Arjuna, who slew them both. The Aṅgas the Kaliṅga king, etc Arjuna, who caused a great carnage among them, as also among the Mlecchas, Yavanas, etc. . The Ambastha king Śrutāyus Arjuna, who slew him . Duryodhana addressed Droṇa in wrath and affection. Droṇa acknowledged his inability to oppose Arjuna on account of his own old age. Droṇa cased Duryodhana in invulnerable armour and urged him to oppose Arjuna with this armour he need have no fear from As Y U Rā men, etc. It was the armour that Śiva had given to Indra, by means of which he slew Vṛtra Indra Aṅgiras Bṛhaspati Agniveśya Droṇa. It was put on, its pieces being joined with Brāhma strings. Brahmán had himself put it on Viṣṇu in days of yore, and on Indra in the fight about Tārakā. Duryodhana Trigartas, etc proceeded towards the chariot of Arjuna . The Pāṇḍavas Somakas Droṇa a fierce battle ensued in front of the Kuru array Droṇa Dhṛṣṭadyumna Droṇas host became divided into three bodies one which retreated towards Kṛtavarman, another towards Jalasandha, another towards Droṇa himself Viviṃśati, etc Bhīma sena king Bāhlīka the Draupadeyas the Govāsana chief Śaibya the Kāśi king the Madra king Śalya Yudhi ṣṭhira Duḥśāsana Sātyaki Sañjaya Cekitāna Śakuni Sahadeva Vinda and Anuvinda Virāṭa king Bāhlīka Śikhaṇḍin the Avanti chief the Sauvīras and Prabhadrakas Dhṛṣṭadyumna Alāyudha Ghaṭotkaca Kuntibhoja and Rā. Alambuṣa. Jayadratha remained in the rear, protected by Kṛpa, etc and the protectors of his wheels were Aśvatthāman on the right and Karṇa on the left his rear was protected by Kṛpa, etc headed by Somadattas son . Droṇa, in front of his array, fought the Pārthas. Vinda and Anuvinda Virāṭa Śikhaṇḍin Bāhlīka the Govāsana king Śaibya the Kāśi king the Bāhlīka king the Draupadeyas Duḥśāsana Sātyaki Kuntibhoja Alambuṣa Nakula and Sahadeva Śakuni, who fled towards Droṇa Rā. Ghaṭotkaca Rā. Alāyudha Yudhiṣṭhira Śalya Viviṃśati, etc Bhīmasena . Bhīmasena Jalasandha Yudhiṣṭhira Kṛtavarman Dhṛṣṭadyumna Droṇa Dhṛṣṭadyumna mounted Droṇas chariot, had his pārṣṇi charioteers slain, etc but was rescued by Sātyaki Droṇa Sātyaki . Sātyaki Droṇa Si Cā Vd M. U. looked at Droṇa acknowledged in Sātyaki the force of Rāma, etc. G Si and Cā. admired him Droṇa invoked the Āgneya weapon, Sātyaki the Vāruṇa weapon. Just at that time the sun went n in his course. Yudhiṣṭhira, etc Droṇa . Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa steadily proceeded towards Jayadratha . Vinda and Anuvinda Arjuna, who slew them both. While Kṛṣṇa groomed Arjunas steeds, Arjuna on foot held the whole Kuru army in check, and piercing the earth with a weapon made a lake for his steeds to drink from, and an arrow hall for them to rest within Nārada came to see the lake . The Si. and Cā etc applauded. The Kurus fiercely attacked Arjuna while he was on foot Arjuna beat back all his assailants the Kurus applauded his prowess, blaming Duryodhana. After finishing the grooming Kṛṣṇa reharnessed the steeds and proceeded with great speed. Duryodhana followed . The progress of Arjuna became irresistible. Duryodhana outran Arjuna in a single chariot, and then turned back, facing Kṛṣṇa . Kṛṣṇa pointed out Duryodhana to Arjuna and urged him to slay him, mentioning Duryodhanas injuries Arjuna promised to slay him Arjuna Duryodhana . Arjuna failed to pierce Duryodhana in consequence of the latters invulnerable armour the chief of the gods gave this invulnerable armour to Aṅgiras Bṛhaspati Indra Arjuna. Arjuna shot strong arrows, strengthened by mantras, at Duryodhana, which were cut off by Aśvatthāman this weapon could not be used again lest it should slay Arjuna himself. Arjuna deprived Duryo dhana of his chariot, and steeds, and weapons when Kṛṣṇa blew Pāñcajanya and Arjuna drew Gāṇḍīva, the Kurus fell n on the ground. The protectors of Jayadratha attacked Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna . Bhūriśravas, etc Arjuna, who blew Devadatta, as Kṛṣṇa blew Pāñcajanya Duryodhana Bhūriśravas, etc Arjuna Aśvatthāman Arjuna . Sañjaya described to Dhṛtarāṣṭra the standards . Arjuna, assailed by many chariot warriors, slew many of them . In the afternoon The Pāñcālas and the Pāṇḍavas the Kurus Bṛhatkṣattra Droṇa Kṣemadhūrti Bṛhatkṣattra Dhṛṣṭaketu Kṣemadhūrti Vīradhanvan Dhṛṣṭaketu Yudhiṣṭhira Droṇa Vikarṇa Nakula Durmukha Sahadeva Vyāghradatta Sātyaki Bhūriśravas the Draupadeyas Rā. Alambuṣa Bhīmasena Yudhiṣṭhira Droṇa Yudhiṣṭhira displayed great heroism both he and Droṇa invoked the Brāhma weapon Yudhiṣṭhira, in distress, getting upon the chariot of Sahadeva is borne away from the field . Kṣemadhūrti the Kaikaya prince Bṛhatkṣattra, who slew Kṣemadhūrti Vīradhanvan Dhṛṣṭaketu Si. and Cā. wondered Vīradhanvan was slain by Dhṛṣṭaketu Durmukha Sahadeva Dur mukha mounted the chariot of Niramitra, who was slain by Sahadeva Nakula Vikarṇa, whom he vanquished Vyāghradatta Sātyaki, who slew him the Magadhas Sātyaki, who nearly exterminated them the Kurus were routed Droṇa Sātyaki Bhūriśravas the Draupadeyas Śatānīka, etc Bhūriśravas, who was slain by the son of Sahadeva Rā. Alambuṣa Bhīmasena Alambuṣa resorted to illusive tricks and caused a river of blood with Rā etc wafting away countless Cedis etc. Bhīma employed the Tvāṣṭra weapon Alambuṣa fled to Droṇa . Ghaṭotkaca Alambuṣa both availed themselves of their illusive power the Pāṇḍavas Alambuṣa Bhīmasenas son, etc who was slain by Ghaṭotkaca . Yuyudhāna Droṇa Yudhiṣṭhira urged Dhṛṣṭadyumna and all his troops, headed by Bhīmasena, to rescue Yuyudhāna Yudhiṣṭhira Droṇa, who slew many and vanquished the Pāṇḍavas, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira heard the sound of Pāñcajanya and thought Arjuna to be in distress he requested Sātyaki to go to Arjuna and bring him news of his safety Arjuna had said in the Dvaitavana to Yudhiṣṭhira, even if Kṛṣṇa, etc assist us, shall yet appoint Sātyaki for our aid, since there is none equal to him, and Yudhiṣṭhira had witnessed his reverence for Arjuna at Dvārakā when returning from the tīrthas, and at Upaplavya his affection for the Pāṇḍavas the day is about to end amongst the Vṛṣṇis two were regarded as atirathas Pradyumna and Sātyaki . Sātyaki hesitated to comply with Yudhiṣṭhiras request on the ground of the counter commands of Arjuna the Sauvīrakas, etc As men, Rā K M. U etc are no match for Arjuna in battle. Yudhiṣṭhira pressed his request, saying that Bhīma, etc will protect him during Sātyakis absence . Sātyaki agreed to obey Yudhiṣṭhira the distance from here is three yojanas he would crush the elephants of the Añjana breed, mounted by Mlecchas, commanded by Karṇa and devoted to Duḥśāsana, at Karṇas command returning from the pursuit of Arjuna and waiting for Sātyaki, and also ordered by Duryodhana he would also crush those elephants ridden by Kirātas and formerly given by the Kirāta king to Arjuna obtaining these and Kṛpa, etc Duryodhana thought lightly of the Pāṇḍavas also the Kāmbojas are on the alert with their eyes on me. Then Sātyaki directed his chariot to be properly equipped shall also have to encounter the Śakas. Yudhiṣṭhira caused quivers, etc to be placed on Sātyakis chariot then Sātyaki set out with his charioteer and friend, the younger brother of Dāruka. Bhīmasena also set out with Sātyaki, but was prevailed upon by Sātyaki to return and protect Yudhiṣṭhira . Yudhiṣṭhira followed Sātyaki in order to reach the chariot of Droṇa. Dhṛṣṭa dyumna and king Vasudāna urged the warriors to protect Sātyaki. Sātyaki made the Kurus flee away. Droṇa Sātyaki, who then, like Arjuna, avoided Droṇa, pointing out to his charioteer the Avantis, etc and then smiting the great host of Karṇa. Kṛtavarman Sātyaki, who slew Kṛtavarmans charioteer and issued out of the Bhoja division, while Kṛtavarman attacked Bhīmasena. Yuyudhāna the Kāmbojas. Droṇa pursued Yuyudhāna, while the Pāṇḍava host began to resist him. The Pāñcālas Kṛtavarman . Dhṛtarāṣṭra wondered before Sañjaya that even such an army as his should be slain, and asked about what passed. Sañjaya, quoting Vidura, rebuked Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and then related the Pārthas the Bhoja king Kṛtavarman Śikhaṇḍin was brought away from the battle by his charioteer Kṛtavarman vanquished all the Pārthas, etc. . Sātyaki turned back to check Kṛta varman, whom he deprived of his chariot then he broke the hostile division and proceeded on his way. Sātyaki Rukma ratha this elephant division fled away. The Magadha king Jalasandha Yuyudhāna, who slew him the Kurus fled away. Droṇa Yuyudhāna . Droṇa, etc. Yuyudhāna Duryodhana fled away, mounting the chariot of Citrasena. Kṛtavarman Yuyudhāna, who made him fall on his knees . Droṇa Sātyaki, whose driver swooned away Sātyaki, acting as his own driver, continued to fight with Droṇa, who was carried away by his steeds the troops broke. Droṇa returned to the front of the array in order to check the Pāṇḍavas . King Sudarśana Sātyaki, who slew him . Sātyakis driver pronounced an eulogy upon him. Sātyaki urged him to take him to the Kāmbojas Yuyudhāna the Yavanas, who fled away thousands of Kāmbojas, etc were similarly slain by Sātyaki Cā. and G. applauded him . Yuyudhāna proceeded towards Arjuna Duryodhana, etc followed him behind and attacked him as he proceeded slowly an awful carnage set in Duryodhanas chariot was taken away by the steeds the others then fled away. Yuyudhāna proceeded towards the chariot of Arjuna . Dhṛtarāṣṭra wondered before Sañjaya at the feats of Yuyudhāna . Sañjaya blamed Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Duryodhana, and then continued his narrative. At the command of Duryodhana the Saṃśaptakas rallying, with a number of Śakas, etc attacked Sātyaki Duḥśāsana Sātyaki many elephants of the race of Añjana, etc were slain, and many steeds of the Vanāyu race, etc and many thousands of warriors many Daradas Sātyaki they fled away. Droṇa, hearing the noise, told his charioteer to take the chariot to the spot where Yuyudhāna was the charioteer remarked that the Pāñcālas and Pāṇḍavas were rushing against Droṇa suddenly Sātyaki appeared, and the broken troops and Duḥśāsana, all struck with panic, rushed towards Droṇas division . Droṇa rebuked Duḥśāsana for his cowardice, and told him to make peace with the Pāṇḍavas . Duḥśāsana Sātyaki. Droṇa the Pāñcālas the Pāṇḍavas, etc. Droṇa slew the Pāñśāla prince Vīraketu, and his brothers Citraketu, Sudhanvan, Citra varman, and Citraratha Dhṛṣṭadyumna mounted Droṇas chariot, but was then carried away by his own steeds having caused a great carnage Droṇa once more took up his station in the midst of his own array . Duḥśāsana Sātyaki the warriors of Duḥśāsana fled away. Duryodhana urged a body of, Trigartas towards Yuyu dhāna, who slew then they turned towards Droṇa. While Sātyaki was proceeding towards Arjuna he was again attacked by Duḥśāsana, who was taken up by the Trigarta leader on his chariot Sātyaki did not slay him, recollecting the words of Bhīmasena, but quickly proceeded along the track of Arjuna . . and Cā. wondered. Bhīmasena, etc the Kauravas. Sātyaki proceeded towards Arjuna. Duryodhana the Pāṇḍavas Duryodhana caused a great carnage. Droṇa the Pāñcālas a dreadful carnage took place. Then there arose a loud uproar from the place where Arjuna was . In the afternoon Droṇa the Somakas Bṛhatkṣattra Droṇa both invoked the Brāhma weapon Bṛhatkṣattra was slain by Droṇa, who then slew the Cedi Dhṛṣṭaketu, and then Dhṛṣtaketus son, and the son of Jarāsandha. The Cedis, etc Droṇa, who slew them, especially the foremost among the Cedis. The Pāñcālas began to tremble and loudly called for Bhīmasena and Dhṛṣṭadyumna. Droṇa slew Kṣatradharman, and caused Cekitāna to be carried away by his steeds. Drupada Droṇa . Yudhiṣṭhira was anxious at not having obtained any intelligence of Arjuna and Sātyaki, and thought of sending Bhīma after Sātyaki, asking him to send him a message by uttering a leonine roar . Bhīma requested Dhṛṣṭadyumna to protect Yudhiṣṭhira, and prepared to set out after Sātyaki and Arjuna the fierce blasts of Pāñcajanya were heard, filling Yudhiṣṭhira with fear. Bhīma broke through the head of the Kuru array the Pāñcālas and Somakas followed him behind the brothers Duḥśala, etc he passed, and rushed against Droṇas division Droṇa Bhīmasena Bhīmas mace pressed Droṇas chariot n into the earth Droṇa, who had previously alighted, was saved Bhīma slew eleven sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra Kuṇḍabhedin, etc. Dhṛta rāṣṭras sons and the soldiers fled away. Bhīmasena then passed towards the division of Droṇa . Bhīma Droṇa Bhīma passing through the Bhoja, etc division and beholding Sātyaki, proceeded with great speed and sighted Arjuna, to whom he made his presence known by a roar Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa uttered loud roars in return Yudhiṣṭhira understood that all was safe, and thought of Arjunas feats . Karṇa Bhīmasena Karṇa mounted the chariot of Vṛṣasena Bhīma uttered a loud roar that gratified Yudhiṣṭhira. Arjuna stretched Gāṇḍīva and Kṛṣṇa blew Pāñcajanya . Duryodhana saw Droṇa, and affectionately chided him for his having allowed Sātyaki and Bhīma to penetrate the Kuru host and approach to the aid of Arjuna. Droṇa counselled Duryodhana to make effective arrangements for the protection of Jayadratha. While going back towards Jayadratha, Duryodhana encountered the two brothers, the Pāñcāla princes, Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujas, the protectors of the wheels of Arjunas chariot, who had formerly, while Arjuna penetrated the Kuru host, been checked in their progress by Kṛtavarman, and were now proceeding towards Arjuna by the flank of the Kuru army. Uttamaujas ascended the chariot of Yudhāmanyu, which Duryodhana pressed n into the earth with his mace, and then Duryodhana ascended the chariot of the Madra king Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujas, ascending two other chariots, proceeded towards Arjuna . Karṇa proceeded against Bhīma. Dhṛtarāṣṭra inquired about the battle . Sañjaya related Bhīma desired to avoid Karṇa and to proceed towards Arjuna Karṇa insultingly challenged Bhīma, who turned back and encountered Karṇa a fierce battle ensued between Bhīma and Karṇa, whom Bhīma deprived of his steeds and chariot. Karṇa mounted another chariot . Continuation of the battle between Karṇa and Bhīma, who recollected the woes in Virāṭas city, etc. . Bhīmas horses of the hue of bears and Karṇas of the hue of swans mingled together Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna became anxious for Bhīma a great carnage took place . Dhṛtarāṣṭras eulogy on Bhīma Karṇa was capable of encountering As and men. Sañjaya continued Bhīma again deprived Karṇa of his steeds and driver. Duryodhana dispatched his brother Durjaya to rescue Karṇa Bhīma slew Durjaya Karṇa wept . Riding upon another chariot Karṇa again encountered Bhīma, who again deprived him of his chariot. Duryodhana dispatched his brother Durmukha to rescue Karṇa Bhīma slew Durmukha, upon whose chariot Karṇa mounted, weeping Karṇa fled, carried away by his steeds . Dhṛtarāṣṭras observations on Bhīmas victory over Karṇa think Destiny reigns supreme. Sañjaya called Dhṛtarāṣṭra the root of this destruction of the world then he related five brothers of Duryodhana Karṇa Bhīmasena, who slew the five brothers, resisting Karṇa the while . Karṇa became despondent of his life Bhīma again deprived Karṇa of his steeds, driver, and bow Karṇa once more fled on foot Duryodhana dispatched other brothers of his against Bhīma, who slew them all . Karṇa wept, recollecting the words of Vidura then, riding upon another chariot he encountered Bhīma, who gladdened Arjuna, etc. . Karṇa sorrowfully surveyed the slain brothers of Duryodhana, and was hard pressed by Bhīma, who was applauded by Cā Bhūriśravas, etc. Duryodhana dis patched seven of his brothers to the rescue of Karṇa they were all slain by Bhīma Bhīma lamented the death of Vikarṇa, who was dear to him. Then he with a shout gladdened Yudhiṣṭhira, who rushed against Droṇa. Beholding the slaughter of thirty one of his brothers by Bhīma, Duryodhana recollected the words of Vidura . Bhīma Karṇa a great carnage was caused by both Cā. and Si. were amazed . Continuation ṛ Si G and Vd. applauded the two combatants. Pierced by Karṇa, Bhīmas driver sought refuge in Sātyakis chariot Karṇa cut off Bhīmas weapons Bhīma leaped into the sky in order to snatch Karṇa off his chariot Karṇa concealed himself on his vehicle the Kurus and Cā. applauded Bhīma Bhīmas weapons being exhausted he fled away from Karṇa and defended himself with the bodies of the elephants slain by Arjuna but, recollecting Arjunas vow, he did not take the life of Karṇa and Karṇa, recollecting his promise to Kuntī, did not take the life of Bhīma, whom he touched with the end of his bow and insulted with his speech. Arjuna then forced Karṇa to fly, and speeded a terrible shaft after him when he was retreating, which was cut off by Aśvatthāman, whom Arjuna then forced to flee away . Dhṛtarāṣṭra lamented . Sañjaya related Sātyaki followed Bhīma Alambuṣa Sātyaki, who slew him, and then proceeded, with his steeds of the Sindhu breed, towards Arjuna Duḥśāsana and the Dhārtarāṣṭras Sātyaki, who slew the steeds of Duḥśāsana, gladdening. Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa . Fifty Trigarta princes Sātyaki, who made them flee away, and then, passing through the Śūrasenas and Kaliṅgas, approached Arjuna, and was eulogized by Kṛṣṇa. Arjuna was not pleased with the arrival of Sātyaki on account of his anxiety for Yudhiṣṭhira . Bhūriśravas Sātyaki they mutually addressed and challenged each other, whereafter the fight began each deprived the other of his chariot, then they fought with swords, then with fists and hands Kṛṣṇa urged Arjuna to protect the tired Sātyaki against Bhūriśravas, who was fresh Sātyaki succumbed to Bhūriśravas Arjuna cut off one of the arms of Bhūriśravas . Bhūriśravas rebuked Arjuna for his unrighteous feat Arjuna justified his conduct . Bhūriśravas, abaning Yuyudhāna, desired to die in prāya he acknowledged the justice of Arjunas plea, and was blessed by Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa . Though forbidden by Kṛṣṇa, etc Sātyaki slew Bhūriśravas sitting in prāya. The warriors did not applaud Sātyaki Si Cā men, and . applauded Bhūriśravas the soldiers thought that it had been ordained by the Creator that it should be so. Sātyaki justified his conduct, quoting Vālmīki . Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sañjaya how Sātyaki could be humiliated by Bhūriśravas. Sañjaya related the history of Śini and of Somadatta, and praised the Vṛṣṇi heroes, vanquishers of the very Dā G As Y U and Rā. . Arjuna proceeded to Jayadrathas chariot. Duryodhana, etc. Arjuna . Duryodhana prevailed upon Karṇa to protect Jayadratha Karṇa promised to his best Duryodhana, etc. Arjuna Si Cā and Pn. applauded Karṇa and Arjuna. Arjuna deprived Karṇa of his steeds, chariot, and driver. Aśvatthāman made Karṇa ride on his chariot. Arjuna invoked the Vāruṇa weapon he caused a great carnage . Arjuna employed the Aindra weapon, etc. . Arjuna Jayadratha Arjuna cut off Jayadrathas standard and slew his driver Jayadratha was placed by six chariot warriors in their midst. Kṛṣṇa covered the sun by means of his yoga power, so that all, except Arjuna, thought the sun to have set, and he urged Arjuna to cut off Jayadrathas head without delay Arjuna caused such a carnage that the warriors abaned Jayadratha in fear and fled away Kṛṣṇa again urged Arjuna to cut off Jayadrathas head without delay, telling him of Jayadrathas father Vṛddha kṣatra, who was still engaged in penances outside Samantapañcaka Arjuna should make the head fall upon the lap of Vṛddhakṣatra himself, lest his own head should crack in pieces this Arjuna did, and as the head fell n from Vṛddhakṣatras lap the latters head split into pieces. Kṛṣṇa then withdrew the darkness created by him Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna blew their conches, and Bhīma, by a tremens shout, communicated to Yudhiṣṭhira the message of victory. Yudhiṣṭhira Droṇa, after the sun had set and Arjuna fought with many mighty chariot warriors . Kṛpa Aśvatthāman Arjuna Kṛpa was carried away by his driver, and Aśvatthāman fled. Arjuna, grieved at Kṛpas death like swoon, Karṇa Arjuna Sātyaki the two Pāñcāla princes . Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna to avoid Karṇa because the latter had yet the lance that Indra had given him. Karṇa Sātyaki Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujas Karṇa such a battle had never been heard of even between G As U or Rā. G and Dā. looked at Sātyaki slew Karṇas charioteer and steeds. Vṛṣasena, etc Sātyaki. Karṇa ascended the chariot of Duryodhana. Sātyaki did not slay the Dhārta rāṣṭras on account of the vow of Bhīmasena. Aśvatthāman, Kṛtavarman, etc were all vanquished by Sātyaki with only one bow in this world there are only three mighty bowmen Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna, and Sātyaki, said Sañjaya. The younger brother of Dāruka soon brought another chariot to Sātyaki Sātyaki ascended it, and Dāruka went to Kṛṣṇa. A new chariot was brought for Karṇa also. Sañjaya told Dhṛtarāṣṭra that thirty one of his sons had been slain by Bhīmasena, etc. . Insulted by Karṇa, Bhīma addressed Arjuna in order to induce the latter to permit him to slay Karṇa Arjuna rebuked Karṇa, and vowed to slay his son Vṛṣasena in his presence. Kṛṣṇa congratulated Arjuna, who attributed the victory to Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa pointed out to Arjuna the results of that days battle then he blew Pāñcajanya and went and informed Yudhiṣṭhira . Kṛṣṇa congratulated Yudhiṣṭhira, who attributed the success to Kṛṣṇas grace Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna once more congratulated him then Bhīma and Sātyaki, whom Yudhiṣṭhira congratulated and embraced . Duryodhanas despondency and cheerless address to Droṇa, whom he censured for treating Arjuna leniently it seems that Karṇa only now wishes us victory . Droṇas reply to Duryodhana he vowed to slay all the Pāñcālas before fing his armour he asked Duryodhana to tell Aśvatthāman to avenge himself on the Somakas, etc even at the risk of his life. Then he proceeded against the Pāṇḍavas . Duryodhana communicated to Karṇa his suspicions about Droṇas sincerity Karṇa removed Duryodhanas suspicions of Droṇa, and attributed the ill success of the Kurus to destiny. Meanwhile the Pāṇḍava divisions appeared for battle, and a fierce battle ensued .
Jayadrathavimokṣaṇa .
. Bhīma seized Jayadratha by the hair, and holding him high up in the air thrust him on the ground, etc and regretted that Yudhiṣṭhira had forbidden to kill him. He then with his arrow shaved Jayadrathas head, leaving only five tufts of hair, and made him promise to say in public assemblies, am the slave of the Pāṇḍavas. They then bound him and thrust him into the chariot then they drove towards the hermitage and presented him to Yudhiṣṭhira. Yudhiṣṭhira and Draupadī set him free with his army. Jayadratha went to Gaṅgādvāra, and pleased Śiva so that he deigned to accept his offerings in person and granted him a boon. Jayadratha asked that he might be able to defeat in battle all the five Pāṇḍavas on their chariots. This Śiva declared to be impossible, as Arjuna was invincible, and was protected by Kṛṣṇa, who was Viṣṇu . Śiva then briefly reminded Jayadratha of four incarnations of Viṣṇu . Thou shalt, however, be able to vanquish for a single day only the rest of Yudhiṣṭhiras forces and the four Pāṇḍavas, but not Arjuna. Then Śiva vanished with Umā, Jayadratha returned home, and the Pāṇḍavas continued to dwell in Kāmyaka .
Jayājayau = Śiva .
Jayānīka1, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Jayānīka2, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Jayanta1, son of Indra and Śacī .
Jayanta2 .
Jayanta3, a Pāñcāla prince .
Jayanta4, a Rudra .
Jayanta5 = Viṣṇu .
Jayanta6, one of the Ādityas .
Jayantī, a river .
Jayapriya, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Jayapriyā, a mātṛ. u, .
Jayarāta, a Kuru warrior .
Jayasena1, a Māgadha prince . Jayatsena1.
Jayasena2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Jayatsena4.
Jayātmaja = Abhimanyu, .
Jayatsena1, a Māgadha king, the son of Jarāsandha . Jārāsandhi, Māgadha.
Jayatsena2, son of Sarvabhauma and Sunandā Kaikeyī .
Jayatsena3, one of the occult names which Yudhiṣṭhira gave to the Pāṇḍavas .
Jayatsena4, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Kaurava.
Jayatsenā, a mātṛ. u, .
Jayāvatī, a mātṛ. u, .
Jayin = Viṣṇu .
Jetā ripūṇāṃ = Skanda, .
Jetṛ = Viṣṇu .
Jharjharin = Śiva
Jhillin, a Vṛṣṇi prince .
Jillika, pl a people .
Jīmūta1 = Sūrya, .
Jīmūta2, name of an athlete .
Jīmūta3, a ṛṣi .
Jīrṇadaṃṣṭra = Śiva .
Jiṣṇu1 = Arjuna, q.v.
Jiṣṇu2 = Viṣṇu, .
Jiṣṇu3, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Jiṣṇukarman, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Jita1 = Śiva .
Jita2 = Viṣṇu .
Jitakāma = Śiva .
Jitakrodha = Viṣṇu .
Jitamanyu = Viṣṇu .
Jitāmitra = Viṣṇu .
Jitāri, son of Avikṣit and grandson of Kuru .
Jitātman, a Viśvadeva .
Jitavatī .
Jitendriya = Śiva .
Jīva1 = Śiva .
Jīva2 = Viṣṇu .
Jīvala, a charioteer of King Ṛtuparṇa .
Jīvana1 = Sūrya, .
Jīvana2 = Śiva .
Jīvana3 = Viṣṇu .
Jñānagamya = Viṣṇu .
Jñāna uttama = Viṣṇu .
Jñānapāvana, a tīrtha .
Jñānātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Jñeyātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Jṛmbhaka, pl a kind of being .
Jṛmbhikā .
Jṛmbhita = Śiva .
Jvālā, daughter of Takṣaka .
Jvālājihva, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Jvalana = Agni, q.v.
Jvalanāstra . Āgneya2.
Jvalanasūnu = Skanda, .
Jvalanātmaja = Skanda, .
Jvalin = Śiva .
Jvara . b, foll.
. b Bhīṣma said In days of yore there was a summit of Meru, named Jyotiṣka, belonging to Savitṛ . There Śiva used to sit with Pārvatī, waited upon by etc. . After some time the Prajāpati Dakṣa commenced to perform a sacrifice, whither all the gods headed by Indra, with the permission of Śiva, repaired mounted on their chariots, proceeding to that spot whence the Gaṅgā is said to issue. Pārvatī asked why Śiva did not himself proceed thither, and was told that in days of yore the deities made an arrangement in consequence of which no share was assigned to Śiva of offerings in sacrifices. He was filled with grief. Śiva ordered Nandin to wait there, and summoning all his yoga force, he, with all his terrible followers, came and destroyed that sacrifice it assumed the form of a deer and tried to fly away through the skies, pursued by Śiva with bow and arrow. A drop of sweat fell from his forehead n on the earth there appeared a terrible fire, whence issued a dreadful being of very short stature, etc who consumed the embodied form of sacrifice and then attacked . and Ṛ who fled in all directions. The earth began to tremble, etc. Brahmán appeased Śiva by promising him a share of the sacrificial offerings the being that had sprung from his sweat should be distributed among all creatures as fever . Blessing upon the reader .
Jyaiṣṭha, name of a month .
Jyeṣṭha1, a brahman. b, sāmavedagataṃ dvijaṃ Jnāmābhivikhyātaṃ, obtained the cult of Nārāyaṇa from the Barhiṣads and communicated it to King Avikalpana
Jyeṣṭha2 = Śiva .
Jyeṣṭha3 = Viṣṇu .
Jyeṣṭhā, a nakṣatra . b, . Aindra.
Jyeṣṭhapuṣkara, a tīrtha . Puṣkara.
Jyeṣṭhasāman, name of a sāman. b, vrato HariḥUpamanyusung by NārāyaṇaĀnuśāsanik.gaḥ
Jyeṣṭhasthāna, a tīrtha .
Jyeṣṭhila, a tīrtha .
Jyeṣṭhilā, a river .
Jyotika, a serpent . Jyotiṣka.
Jyotirathā, a river . next.
Jyotirathyā, a river . the prec.
Jyotis1, son of the Vasu Ahas .
Jyotis2, a companion of Skanda .
Jyotis3 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
jyotis, pl selected passages, .
Jyotiṣām ayana = Śiva .
Jyotiṣāṃ nidhiḥ = Śiva .
Jyotiṣka1, a serpent . Jyotika.
Jyotiṣka2, a weapon .
Jyotiṣka3, a summit of Meru. b, .
Jyotsnākālī, a daughter of Soma . Somaputrī.
Ka1 = Brahmán .
Ka2 = Dakṣa, .
Ka3 = Viṣṇu .
Kabandha1, a Rākṣasa .
Kabandha2, the trunk of Rāhu, .
Kaca, a brahman, the son of Bṛhaspati. Janamejaya said How did Yayāti get Devayānī Vaiśampā yana related In the many battles between the gods and the Asuras, the gods had for their purohita Bṛhaspati Āṅgirasa, and the Asuras Uśanas Kāvya . As Uśanas, by his science Sañjīvinī, restored the fallen Dānavas to life, and Bṛhaspati was unable to revive the fallen gods, the gods prevailed upon Bṛhaspatis son Kaca to repair to Uśanas and conciliate him and his daughter Devayānī and learn the Sañjīvinī. K. then repaired to the capital of Vṛṣaparvan, the king of the Dānavas, and promising to practise brahma carya for, years he was accepted by Uśanas as his pupil. Young as he was he, by singing and dancing and playing on instruments, etc soon gratified Devayānī. After years the Dānavas, having discovered who he was, slew him, and one time hacked his body to pieces and gave it to wolves and jackals, another time they pounded it into paste and mixed it with the waters of the ocean, but both times Devayānī prevailed upon Uśanas to restore K. to life by the Sañjīvinī, summoning him and saying, Come. Then slaying him for the third time they burned the body and mixed the ashes with the wine which Uśanas drank. As Devayānī again asked her father to revive K Uśanas said It is of no use, as he is always killed again thou art always worshipped by the Bráhman, the brahmans, the gods including Indra, the Vasus, the Aśvins, the enemies of the gods and the whole world, therefore not grieve for a mortal. As Devayānī said she would starve, Śukra imparted the Sañjīvinī to K who, though reduced to powder, remembered everything. K. then came out, ripping open the stomach of Śukra and then revived Śukra by the Sañjīvinī. Uśanas declared that henceforth that brahman who would drink wine should be reckoned to have committed the sin of slaying a brahman. K. stayed with Śukra for, years . When K. was about to return to the gods Devayānī asked him to become her husband, and as he refused she cursed him, saying that his science should bear no fruit. K. again cursed Devayānī, saying that no ṛṣis son should take her hand, and that his science should bear fruit, if not to himself, at least to him to whom he might impart it. Then he went to the abode of Indra, and the gods declared that he should become a sharer with them in sacrificial offerings, . Aṅgirasaḥ pautra, Āṅgirasa, Bṛhaspatisuta.
Kaccha, pl a people .
Kacchapa, a serpent .
kāśakuśādayaḥ, .
Kāśapauṇḍra, pl a people .
Kaśeraka, a Yakṣa .
Kāśeyī = Sunandā, .
Kāśi, pl a people . d, . e, . g, . b, .
Kāśīśa1, contemporary with the great battle .
Kāśīśa2 = Divodāsa, .
Kāśīśvarasya tīrtha .
Kāśika .
Kāśika, pl a people = Kāśi, pl .
Kāśikanyā = Ambā, .
Kāśikarūṣarāja = Alarka, .
Kāśin, a son of Kavi. b, .
Kāśinagara = Vārāṇasī, .
Kāśinandana = Sudeva, .
Kāśipa = Suvarṇanāman, .
Kāśipati1, the father of Ambā, Ambikā, and Ambālikā . Kāśirāja.
Kāśipati2, contemporary of the great battle . Kāśirāja5, Kāśya2.
Kāśipati3 = Pratardana, .
Kāśipura = Vārāṇasī, .
Kāśipurī = Vārāṇasī, .
Kāśirāja1, one or more princes .
Kāśirāja2, the father of Ambā, Ambikā, and Ambālikā . Kāśipati1.
Kāśirāja3, the father of the two wives of Bṛhadratha .
Kāśirāja4 = Subāhu, .
Kāśirāja5, contemporary of the great battle . Abhibhū, Kāśipati2, Kāśya2.
Kāśirāja6 = Sudeva, .
Kāśirājaduhitarau = Ambikā and Ambālikā, .
Kāśirājan = Kāśirāja2, .
Kāśirājasutā = Ambā, .
Kāśirājasutāḥ = Ambā, Ambikā, and Ambālikā, .
Kaśirājasute1 = Ambikā and Ambālikā, .
Kāśirājasute2 = the wives of Bṛhadratha, .
Kāśisutā = Ambā, .
Kāśisute = Ambikā and Ambālikā, .
Kāśmīra, pl a people . Kāśinīraka, pl.
Kāśmīra, adj .
Kāśmīraka, adj. .
Kāśmīraka, pl a people, = Kāśmīra, pl .
Kāśmīramaṇḍala . b, .
Kāśya1, the father of Ambā, Ambikā, and Ambālikā . Kāśipati, Kāśirāja.
Kāśya2, the Kāśi king at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira . Abhibhū, Kaśipati2, Kaśirāja5.
Kāśya3 = Babhru7, .
Kāśya4, a ṛṣi .
Kāśya, pl a people. = Kāśi, pl .
Kāśyā = Balandharā, the wife of Bhīmasena, .
Kāśyā = Ambā, .
Kāśyapa, a ṛṣi and prajāpati, son of Marīci. Sauti related Kadrū and Vinatā, the daughters of Prajāpati, obtained from their husband K. the boon that Kadrū would have, snakes as her offspring, and Vinatā two sons, who would surpass the, sons of Kadrū. Then K. went to the forest. After a long time Kadrū brought forth, eggs and Vinatā two. After years the, eggs of Kadrū burst, but the twins of Vinatā did not yet appear. Vinatā then broke one of the eggs, and out came Aruṇa . His lower extremities were yet undeveloped, and he cursed his mother, saying that she should serve as a slave, but be delivered by her other son, if she would wait years patiently without breaking the egg. After the expiration of the years Garuḍa came out of the egg, . b, . e, . d, . u, . bb, . b, . b, married thirteen daughters of DakṣaPrajāpatiḥ, called Kṛṣṇa VṛṣākapiBhaṅgāsvanop.sya sc. putrāḥ surāsurāḥsya surāś caiva Asurāś ca sutās tathāĀnuśāsanik.praised Śivamaharṣir api caitad vai Mārīcaḥ Ko B. Kā bravītmaharṣeḥ, sesame seeds sprung from the limbs of K.SuvarṇotpattiMārīcaḥĀnuśāsanik.mahān ṛṣiḥ, among the masters of yogaBisastainyop. etymology of his name Śapa thavidhi Umā Maheśvarasaṃv.husband of AditiBalarāmaSuparṇaḥ... Ksyātmajaḥ, i.e. GaruḍaĀnuśāsanik.among the seven gurus of Dhaneśvara in the northPavanārjunasaṃv.tyaktvā mahītvaṃ nāśaṃ jagāma, Page3 b samāhitaḥKāśyapīKāśyapīĀnuśāsanik.MārīcaḥGuruśiṣyasaṃv.
Kāśyapa1, one or more brahmarṣis of Kaśyapas race . g, . Kaśyapa and the following headings.
Kāśyapa2 = Kaṇva, .
Kāśyapa3 = Vibhāṇḍaka, .
Kāśyapa4 = Rājadharman, .
Kāśyapa5 = Viśvāvasu, .
Kāśyapa6 = Indra, .
Kāśyapa7, name of a fire .
Kāśyapa, dual, = Yaja and Upayaja, .
Kāśyapa, pl. . b, .
Kaśyapadvīpa .
Kāśyapanandana, pl. = the gods, .
Kāśyapaputra = Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, .
Kāśyapātmaja = Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, .
Kāśyapeya1 = Garuḍa, .
Kāśyapeya2 = Dāruka, .
Kāśyapeya, pl. = the Ādityas, .
Kāśyapi = Rājadharman, .
Kāśyapī = the Earth, .
Kādraveya, pl. = the serpents . Kadrūja, pl Kadrūputra, pl Nāga, pl Sarpa, pl.
Kadru = Śiva .
Kadrū, daughter of Dakṣa, wife of Kaśyapa, and mother of the serpents . b After a long time K. brought forth, eggs, which burst after years, . Once K. and Vinatā bet about the colour of Uccaiḥśravas, and she who lost should become the others slave, Vinatā asserting that he was all white, K. that he was black in his tail. K. ordered her sons to transform themselves into black hair and cover the horses tail. When they refused she cursed them, saying that the Fire should consume them at the snake sacrifice of Janamejaya. Seeing that the snakes had multi plied exceedingly, Brahmán, with all the gods, sanctioned this curse, which had been indicated in the Purāṇas, and propitiated Kaśyapa by bestowing upon him the knowledge of neutralizing poisons, . In the morning K. and Vinatā went to inspect Uccaiḥśravas. Description of Samudra, . The Nāgas, notwithstanding their refusal, went and became hairs in the horses tail. Second description of the Ocean, v. Samudra darśana, . Vinatā, having lost the wager, became the slave of K. Garuḍa, .
Kadrūja, pl. = the serpents . Kādraveya, pl Kadruputra, pl.
Kadrūputra, pl. = the serpents . Kādraveya, pl Kadrūja, pl.
Kāhali = Śiva .
Kahoḍa, a brahman, father of Aṣṭāvakra .
Kahoḍasūnu = Aṣṭāvakra, .
Kaiśika, pl a people .
Kaikaya, pl name of a people, especially five brothers who joined Yudhiṣṭhira . Kaikeya pl Kekaya pl.
Kaikaya1 = Bṛhatkṣattra, .
Kaikaya2 = Vinda, .
Kaikaya3, .
Kaikaya4, a king of the Kekayas . Kaikeya, Kaikeyarāja.
Kaikaya, dual = Vinda and Anuvinda, .
Kaikayarājaputra .
Kaikayarājaputra, pl. .
Kaikeya, pl in most passages denoting five brothers, sons of the king of the Kekayas, but sometimes the people . Kaikaya pl Kekaya pl.
Kaikeya, dual. = Vinda and Anuvinda, .
Kaikeya1 = Bṛhatkṣattra, . Kaikaya.
Kaikeya2 = Vinda, . Kaikaya.
Kaikeya3 = Kaikaya4, .
Kaikeya4, one or more Kekaya princes .
Kaikeyaputra = Viśoka, .
Kaikeyarāja = Kaikaya4, .
Kaikeyī = Sunandā, the wife of Sarvabhauma, .
Kaikeyī, wife of Ajamīḍha .
Kaikeyī = Kumārī, the wife of Bhīmasena Pārikṣita, .
Kaikeyī, wife of Daśaratha .
Kaikeyī = Sudeṣṇā, the wife of Virāṭa .
Kaikeyī = Sumanā, .
Kaikeyīnandivardhana = Uttara, .
Kailāsa, a mountain, the abode of Kubera and Śiva . b, . d The mountain K. is six yojanas high, there the gods assemble, there is Viśālā, there live innumerable Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Kinnaras, Nāgas, Suparṇas, and Gan dharvas, near the abode of Kubera, . d Beyond K. is the path of the all perfect Devarṣis, if anyone goes beyond this the Rākṣasas slay him with iron darts and other weapons, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, .
Kailāsa, pl v. Kosala, pl.
Kailāsagirivāsin = Śiva .
Kailāsaka, a serpent .
Kailāsanilaya = Kubera, .
Kailātaka, adj .
Kairāta, adj. . b, .
Kairāta, pl a people, = Kirāta, pl .
Kairātaka, adj. . also Kailātaka.
Kairātaparvan, the rd of the minor parvans of Mhbhr forming an episode to Arjunas journey to the abode of Indra . . It is anew related how Arjuna set out from the Kāmyaka wood towards the north he entered a terrible forest, resorted to by Siddhas and Cāraṇas, and then proceeded to the Himavat . For four months he practised austerities, until the ṛṣis made representations about it to Śiva, who dismissed them after having removed their fears . Then Śiva with his bow and arrows, in the guise of a Kirāta, accompanied by Umā in the guise of a Kirāta woman, by merry spirits, and thousands of women, approached Arjuna as he was about to kill Mūka, a son of Danu, who in the form of a boar would have killed Arjuna. Arjuna and Śiva at the same time pierced Mūka with their arrows, and killed him when dying he again assumed his rākṣasa form then they fought against each other, first with arrows, then with the very bows, then with swords, then with trees and stones, then with the fists, and then by clasping each other at last Arjuna lost his senses, and was almost reduced to a ball of flesh when he regained consciousness he made a clay image of Śiva, which he worshipped with a garland, which then appeared on the head of the Kirāta he thus learned that it was Śiva, and prostrated himself at his feet. Śiva declared that Arjunas prowess was equal to his own, promised to give him his weapon, and gave him eye, so that he beheld him in his true form, together with Umā. Arjuna then fell on his knees and worshipped him, saying O Kapardin etc. . Śiva said that Arjuna was in a former life Nara, etc. When granted a boon, Arjuna asked Śiva to give him the Pāśupata weapon named Brahmaśiras . Having purified himself he was instructed in its use on the condition that he should not hurl it against a human being, for then it would destroy the universe. The earth trembled, etc. The gods and Dānavas beheld the weapon in its bodily shape standing by the side of Arjuna. When Arjuna had been touched by Śiva, all that was evil in his body was dispelled. Having said to Arjuna, Go thou into heaven, Śiva went up into the skies accompanied by Umā . Then Arjuna was on the Himavat visited by the Lokapālas, viz Varuṇa, together with rivers, Nāgas, Daityas, and Sādhyas Kubera, who dwells on Kailāsa, golden coloured, accompanied by Yakṣas Yama, with staff in hand, illuminating the three worlds, and the Guhyakas, Gandharvas, and Nagās, accompanied by those lords of the creation the Pitṛs further Śakra, with Māhendrāṇī, mounted on the neck of Airāvata, and surrounded by the gods, and eulogized by Gandharvas and ṛṣis. Each of them occupied a particular summit of Himavat . They granted him sight, that he might see them. Yama said that Arjuna would defeat the Nivātakavacas, etc and gave him his irresistible staff as a weapon. Varuṇa gave him his irresistible nooses. Kubera said that in bygone kalpas Arjuna had always gone through ascetic austerities along with them, and gave him his favourite weapon Antardhāna . Indra said he would descend to earth in his chariot with Mātali as his charioteer, and taking him to heaven grant him all his celestial weapons .
Kaiṭabha, a Dānava. b, . ee, . b, . b, .. Asura, Dānava .
Kaiṭabhanāśinī = Durgā, .
Kaitava = Ulūka, q.v.
Kaitava, pl. a people . Kaitavya, pl.
Kaitavya = Ulūka, q.v.
Kaitavya, pl a people .
kaivarta, pl name of a caste, .
Kāka, pl a people .
Kākī .
Kākī, one of the mothers of Śiśu .
Kakṣa, pl a people .
Kakṣaka, a serpent .
Kakṣasena, name of one or more princes o rājarṣiḥ Vaśiṣṭhāya mahātmane nyāsaṃ yathāvat saṃnyasya jagāma sumahāyaśāḥPage3 a rājarṣiḥ, enumerationAnugītāp.had attained to high success by way of gifts
Kakṣeyu, a prince .
Kākṣīva = Kākṣīvat .
Kakṣīvat, a ṛṣi . next and prec.
Kākṣīvat = Kakṣīvat . the prec.
Kākṣīvatī = Bhadrā, .
Kakubha = Śiva .
Kākudīka, name of a weapon .
Kakutstha, an ancient king in Ayodhyā .
Kākutstha1 = Anenas, .
Kākutstha2 = Rāma, the son of Daśaratha, .
Kākutstha3 = Lakṣmaṇa, the son of Daśaratha, .
Kāla, etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc . Antaka, Mṛtyu, Yama.
Kāla2 = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Kālā, daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa .
Kala, pl a class of pitṛs .
Kalā = Sūrya, .
Kalā, pl . Do. = Śiva .
Kālacakra = Sūrya, .
Kalaśa, a serpent .
Kālaśaila, a mountain . Kālaparvata.
Kalaśapotaka, a serpent .
Kalaśī, a tīrtha .
Kalaśodara, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kalada, pl a people .
Kāladantaka, a serpent .
Kālādhyakṣa = Sūrya, .
Kālaghaṭa, a brahman .
kālāgni, .
kalahaṃsa, pl. .
kālajñāna, .
Kālajoṣaka, pl a people .
kālajvalana = kālāgni, .
Kālakā, a female Asura . Kālā.
Kālakākṣa1, a Daitya .
Kālakākṣa2, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kalakala = Śiva .
Kālakañja or Kālakhañja, pl a tribe of Asuras . d, . d, . Kālakeya, pl.
Kālakaṇṭha, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kālakaṭaṅkaṭa = Śiva .
Kālakavṛkṣīya, a muni .
Kālakeya, pl a tribe of Asuras Aṃśāvat.the offspring of Kālā, four are enumeratedSabhākriyāp.yathāsurān Kān devo Vajradharaḥ, sc. kampayām āsaAgastyop.followed VṛtraNivātaka vacayuddhap.in Hiraṇyapura, Kālakañja, pl.Sainyaniryāṇap.Dānavaiḥ, had been vanquished by Arjuna, Abhimanyuvadhap.had been slain by ArjunaJayadrathavadhap.sahasrāṇi caturdaśa, Karṇap.had been slain by Arjunasa Kān Asurān, pūrvaṃ devair ajitaṃ Kaiḥ, sc. ArjunaSaṃvartta Maruttīyapravrā jayeyaṃ Kān pṛthivyāṃ, says Indra
Kālākhya = Śiva, .
Kālakhañja, pl v. Kālakañja, pl.
Kālakīrti, a prince .
Kālakoṭi, a tīrtha .
Kālakūṭa1, a poison . Kālakūṭaka.
Kālakūṭa2, a mountain .
Kālakūṭa, pl a people, the inhabitants of Kālakūṭa .
Kālakūṭaka, a poison = Kālakūṭa .
Kālāmra, a tree in the varṣa Bhadrāśva. h, .
Kālamukha, pl a people .
kālānala = kālāgni, .
Kālanātha = Śiva .
Kālanemi, an Asura .
Kālanemihan = Viṣṇu .
Kālañjara, a mountain . . p, .
Kalāpa, a muni .
Kalāpagrāma, a city .
Kālaparvata, a mountain . Kālaśaila.
Kālapatha, a son of Viśvāmitra .
Kālapṛṣṭha, a serpent .
Kālapūjita = Śiva .
Kālapuṣpaphalaprada = Śiva .
Kālarātrī, .
Kālārka = Kālasūrya, .
Kālasāhvaya, a hell .
Kalasodara, v. Kalaśodara.
Kālasūrya, .
Kālatīrtha, a tīrtha .
Kālātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Kālatoyaka, pl a people .
Kālava, pl a people .
kālavahni = kālāgni, .
Kālavega, a serpent .
Kālaviṅka, a tīrtha .
Kālayavana, a prince. b, .
Kālayogin = Śiva .
Kālehikā, a matṛ. u, .
Kāleya, pl a tribe of Asuras . Asura, Kālakeya, pl.
Kali1, name of the fourth yuga . b, . b, . b, . Kaliyuga.
Kali2, a term of dice and name of ill luck in general . Kali1.
Kali3, a Devagandharva .
Kali4, = Sūrya, .
Kali5, = Śiva .
Kālī = Satyavatī, the wife of Śāntanu .
Kālī = Durgā, .
Kālikā, a goddess .
Kālikā, a river .
Kālikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kālikāśrama, a tīrtha .
Kālikāsaṅgama, v. Kālikā.
Kālikeya, a Kuru warrior, son of Subala .
Kalinda, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kalinda, pl. v. Kaliṅga, pl.
Kālindī = Yamunā .
Kaliṅga1
Kaliṅga2, the king of the Kaliṅgas at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira . Kāliṅga.
Kaliṅga3, a warrior of Skanda u, .
Kaliṅga, pl a people . d, . c . e, . g, . Kālinga, pl.
Kāliṅga1 . Kaliṅga, Kaliṅgādhipa, Kaliṅgādhipati, Kaliṅgaka, Kāliṅgaka, Kaliṅgarāja.
Kāliṅga2 = Śakradeva
Kāliṅga, pl a people = Kaliṅga, pl .
Kaliṅgādhipa . Kāliṅga.
Kaliṅgādhipati . Kāliṅga.
Kaliṅgaka . Kāliṅga.
Kāliṅgaka . Kāliṅga.
Kaliṅgarāja . Kāliṅga.
Kāliṅgī = Karambhā, .
Kāliṅgī .
Kāliya, a serpent .
Kālīyaka, a serpent .
Kaliyuga, the fourth yuga . . In the K. only a quarter of virtue abides, Nārāyaṇa is black, etc . Kali1.
Kalkala, pl a people .
Kalkin, a brahman. When the Sun, the Moon, and Bṛhaspati simultaneously enter the constellation of Puṣya, the Kṛta age will begin again, and commissioned by Time a brahman named Kalkin Viṣṇuyaśas, born in Sambhalagrāma, in the house of a brahman, will, surrounded by brahmans, exterminate all the Mleccha crowds . Having exterminated the thieves and the robbers, K. will, at a great horse sacrifice, duly give away this earth to the brahmans and then enter a delightful forest, and the Kṛtayuga will be re established. This is said in the Purāṇa which is narrated by Vāyu, . b, .
Kalmāṣa, a serpent .
Kalmāṣapāda, Saudāsa, king of Ayodhyā and husband of Madayantī . The rājarṣi of the race of Ikṣvāku Kalmāṣapāda once when hunting met the viprarṣi Śaktri, the eldest of Vasiṣṭhas sons, and ordered him to stand out of his way, and as Śaktri did not yield K. struck him with his whip. Śaktri then cursed him, saying From this day thou shalt be a rākṣasa, eating human flesh. The king began humbly to propitiate the ṛṣi, but Viśvāmitra passed before them without being seen, and caused a rākṣasa named Kiṅkara to enter the king. Viśvāmitra then went away. At this time a hungry brahman beheld in the wood K who was terribly afflicted by the rākṣasa, and asked the king for some food with meat. K. asked him to stay there for a moment, and having roved for some time at pleasure at last entered his inner apartments. When waking at midnight and remembering his promise, he summoned his cook, and as the cook did not find any meat K. said Feed him with human flesh. The cook then took human flesh from the place where the executioners were, and offered it to the hungry brahman. Seeing with his spiritual power of vision what kind of food it was, the brahman in anger said that the king himself should take a fancy to such food and wander over all the earth alarming all creatures. The curse on the king, being thus repeated a second time, became very strong, and possessed by the rākṣasa the king lost all his senses. A while after K beholding Śaktri, in order to revenge him self for the curse slew him and ate him up. And Viśvāmitra caused that rākṣasa also to devour the other sons of Vasiṣṭha, . b, .
Kalmāṣapadasaras, v. Kalmāṣapāda.
Kalmāṣī, a river .
Kālodaka, a tīrtha. b, . i By bathing in K. and Nandikuṇḍa and Uttaramānasa, etc one is cleansed from the sin of fœticide, .
kalpa, .
Kalpa = Śiva .
kalpavṛkṣa, .
Kalyāṇī, a mātṛ. u, .
Kāma1 . b, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms Anaṅga, . Jagatpati, q.v. Kandarpa, . Makaradhvaja, q.v. Manmatha, . Manobhava, . Saṃkalpaja, . Smara, .
Kāma2, name of a fire .
Kāma3, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Kāma4 = Śiva .
Kāma5 = Viṣṇu .
Kāmā, daughter of Pṛthuśravas and wife of Ayutanāyin .
Kāmacarī, a mātṛ. u, .
kāmaśāstra, .
Kāmada1 = Sūrya, .
Kāmada2 = Skanda, .
Kāmada3 = Śiva .
Kāmadā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kāmadeva = Viṣṇu .
kāmadugha, .
kāmaduh, .
kāmaduha, .
Kāmaghna = Śiva .
Kāmahan = Viṣṇu .
Kāmajit = Skanda, .
Kāmākhya, a tīrtha .
Kāmakrodha = Śiva .
Kāmakṛt = Viṣṇu .
Kamalā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kamalākṣa1, a Kuru warrior .
Kamalākṣa2, an Asura. d, .
Kamalākṣī, a mātṛ. u, .
Kāmanāśaka = Śiva .
Kāmaṇḍa, a ṛṣi .
Kāmaṇḍaka = Kāmaṇḍa, .
Kamaṇḍaludhara = Śiva .
Kāmaṇḍaluniṣaṅga1 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. Śiva .
Kāmāṅganāśa = Śiva, .
Kāmapāla = Viṣṇu .
Kāmaprada = Viṣṇu .
Kāmaratha, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Kāmāri = Śiva .
Kamaṭha1, a king .
Kamaṭha2, a ṛṣi .
Kāmathaka, a serpent .
Kāmātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Kambala1, a serpent .
Kambala2, a tīrtha . the prec.
Kambala3, a varṣa on Kuśadvīpa .
Kāmboja, pl a people . b, .
Kāmboja1 = Sudakṣiṇa, . Kāmbojarāja.
Kāmboja2 = the father of Sudakṣiṇa . Kāmbojarāja.
Kāmboja3 = the younger brother of Sudakṣiṇa .
Kāmboja4, an ancient king .
Kāmboja, adj. .
Kāmbojarāja1 .
Kāmbojarāja2 = Sudakṣiṇa .
Kāmbojarāja3 = the father of Sudakṣiṇa .
Kāmin = Viṣṇu .
Kampa1, a Vṛṣṇi prince.
Kampa2 = Śiva .
Kampana, a king .
Kampanā, a river .
Kāmpilya, the capital of the Pāñcālas . b, .
Kaṃsa, son of Ugrasena, king of Mathurā, enemy of Kṛṣṇa . f, . b, . Bhojarāja, Ugrasenasuta.
Kaṃsa Keśinisūdana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Kaṃsanisūdana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Kāmya = Śiva, .
Kāmyā, an Apsaras .
Kāmyaka1, name of a forest Kirmīravadhap.ṃ nāma tad vanaṃSaubhavadhop.Kāmyakavanapraveśaṃ nāma tad vanaṃIndralokābhigamanap.vanaṃNalopā khyānap.Tīrthayātrāp.Dhaumyatīrthak.vaneTīrthayātrāp.Bhīmakadalīkhaṇḍapr.āśrameāśramaṃYakṣa yuddhap.Nivātakavaca yuddhap.āśramaṃMārkāṇḍeyas.vanaṃMṛgasvapnodbhavap.kānanottamaṃDraupadī haraṇap.Jayadrathavimokṣaṇap.Pativratāmāhātmyap.KarṇaāśramātĀraṇeyap.Ghaṭotkacavadhap.
Kāmyaka2, a lake .
. As Yudhiṣṭhira declared that Bhūriśravas, Śala, Jalasandha, etc and Karṇa, and the Dhārtarāṣṭras, together with the kings who had been injured by the Pāṇḍavas, could not now be vanquished, that all the Kaurava soldiers and their families had been honoured with wealth and luxuries by Duryodhana, and would sacrifice their lives for him, and that, although Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and Kṛpa, all knowing celestial weapons and being invincible, behaved equally towards both parties, they would certainly, to pay off the royal favours they enjoyed, lay n their very lives in battle, Bhīma remained silent. While they were conversing thus Vyāsa appeared, and, taking Yudhiṣṭhira into a corner, taught him, after he had purified himself, the science of Pratismṛti, by means of which Arjuna should proceed to Mahendra, Rudra, Varuṇa, Kubera, and Yama, to receive weapons from them. He also advised him to go to some other forest in order not to cause uneasiness to the ascetics and exterminate the deer and destroy the plants. Then Vyāsa disappeared. The Pāṇḍavas went to the forest of Kāmyaka on the banks of the Sarasvatī, followed by numerous brahmans versed in śikṣā and akṣara, and lived there devoted to the Dhanurveda, and sacrificing to the Pitṛs, the gods, and the brahmans .
Kanaka = Śiva .
Kanakadhvaja, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Kanakākṣa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kanakāṅgada, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Kanakadhvaja.
Kanakāṅgadin = Viṣṇu .
kanakaparvata, said of Mahāmeru, .
Kanakāpīḍa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kanakāvatī, a mātṛ. u, .
Kanakāyu, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Karakāyu.
Kanakhala, name of a tīrtha . f, . the next.
Kanakhala, pl a range of mountains . the prec.
kānana, pl .
Kāñcana, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Kāñcanacchavis = Śiva .
Kāñcanākṣa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kāñcanākṣī, one of the seven Sarasvatīs. i, .
Kāñcanaṣṭhīvin = Suvarṇaṣṭhīvin, .
Kāñcanavarman = Hiraṇyavarman, .
Kāñci, pl a people . the next.
Kāñcya, pl a people .
Kandarā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kaṇḍarīka, a brahman. b, .
Kandarpa = Kāma, q.v.
Kaṇḍūti, a mātṛ. u, .
Kaṇika, the minister of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Kaṇikavākya . . Dhṛtarāṣṭra consulted the minister Kaṇika, who, after having expounded some very Machiavellian principles of policy, and told the fable of the jackal, the tiger, the mouse, the wolf, and the mongoose, concluded by advising him to destroy the Pāṇḍavas .
. b The Sauvīra king Śatruñjaya questioned Ṛ. Bhāradvāja about the acquisition of profit, etc and was taught by him the king should have the rod of chastise ment always uplifted in his hands the different other duties of the king. Śatruñjaya obeyed these instructions and obtained prosperity .
Kaniṣṭha = Śiva .
Kaṅka1, an ancient king .
Kaṅka2, a Vṛṣṇi prince . Kampa1.
Kaṅka3, the name which Yudhiṣṭhira assumed when he lived disguised as a brahman in the palace of Virāṭa . Vaiyāghrapadya.
Kaṅka4 .
Kaṅka, pl a people .
Kaṅkanā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kānta1 = Skanda, .
Kānta2 = Śiva .
Kānta3 = Viṣṇu .
Kaṇṭakinī, a mātṛ. u, .
Kāntāraka, pl a people .
Kānti, pl a people .
Kāntika, pl a people .
Kaṇva, a ṛṣi . b, . c, . Kāśyapa.
Kaṇvāśrama, a tīrtha .
Kanyā, a tīrtha .
Kanyābhartṛ = Skanda, .
Kanyāśrama, a tīrtha .
Kanyāhrada, a tīrtha .
Kanyakāguṇa, pl a people .
Kānyakubja, a city, the present Kanauj . b, .
Kanyākūpa, a tīrtha. h By bathing in K. and Balākā one acquires great fame among the gods, .
Kanyāsaṃvedya, a tīrtha . Kanyā.
Kanyātīrtha, one or more tīrthas .
Kapa, pl a class of demons. p Vāyu said When the gods with Indra were in the mouth of Mada, Cyavana took away from them the earth, and they had been deprived of the heaven by the K. Brahmán told the gods to seek the protection of the brahmans. The brahmans commenced a rite for the destruction of the K. The K. then sent Dhanin, who told the brahmans to desist, as the K. were equal to M. ṛ. and very pious in all respects . As the brahmans refused, the K. attacked them, but the brahmans destroyed them by creating blazing fires. The gods having slain many Dā. in battle did not know that the K. had been slain by the brahmans, but were informed by Nārada then their energy increased and they obtained immortality, .
Kapālahasta = Śiva .
Kapālamālin = Śiva, .
Kapālamocana, a tīrtha . k, .
Kapālavat = Śiva .
Kāpālī = Durgā, .
Kapāli = Śiva, q.v.
Kapālin, name of a Rudra .
Kāpālin = Śiva, q.v.
Kapardin1 = Śiva, q.v. Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Kapardin, pl. = the Rudras, .
Kapardisutā = Sinīvalī, .
Kapaṭa, an Asura .
Kapi = Viṣṇu .
Kāpī, a river .
Kapiśa = Civa .
Kapidhvaja, Kapiketana = Arjuna, q.v.
Kapila1, a ṛṣi, promulgator of the Sāṅkhya system and identified with Viṣṇu . . b, . c, . b, . b, . g, .
Kapila2, a serpent king .
Kapila3 = Sūrya, .
Kapila4 = Śiva .
Kapila5 = Viṣṇu . Kapila1.
Kapilā, daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa .
Kapilā, a river .
Kapilā = Durgā, .
Kapilā, a brahman woman, wife of Āsuri. b, .
Kāpila, a varṣa in Kuśadvīpa .
Kāpila, adj. . b, . b, .
Kāpila, pl. = the Sāṅkhyas, .
Kapilācārya = Viṣṇu .
Kapilāśva, a king .
Kapilāhrada, a tīrtha .
Kapilasya kedāra, a tīrtha .
Kapilātīrtha, a tīrtha .
Kapilavaṭa, a tīrtha .
Kāpileya = Pañcaśikha, .
Kapīndra = Viṣṇu .
Kapīndraputrī = Jāmbavatī, .
Kapiñjalā, a river .
Kapipravaraketana = Arjuna, q.v.
Kapirājaketu = Arjuna, .
Kapiṣṭalasya kedāra, a tīrtha .
Kapivaradhvaja = Arjuna, q.v.
Kapota1, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Kapota2 = Śiva .
. b Bhārgava related A cruel fowler was surprised in the forest by a great storm the paths of the forest were all submerged he caught a she pigeon and immured her in a cage when the sky cleared he passed the night under a tree, having bowed n to the deities that had this tree for their resort . In one of the branches of that tree the male pigeon lamented the loss of his wife . The she pigeon answered him from within the hunters cage, telling him to the duties of hospitality to the fowler . The male pigeon welcomed the fowler, who was stiff with cold, by igniting a fire as the fowler was hungry, the pigeon him self entered the fire, at which the fowler became terrified, thinking of his own cruel life, expressed his repentance, and set at liberty the she pigeon, etc. . The she pigeon lamented for the death of her spouse then she threw herself into the blazing fire the couple of pigeons ascended to heaven . The fowler took to rigid penances, perished in a forest conflagration, and beheld him self in heaven in splenr like Indra among Y. and G. and Si. .
Kapotaroman, one or more princes .
Kāpoti, a brahman. b, .
Karabha, a king, .
Karabhañjaka, pl a people .
Karahāṭaka, a country .
Karaka, pl a people .
Karakākṣa, a Kuru warrior .
Karakarṣa, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Karakāyu, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Kanakāyu.
Karāla1, a Devagandharva .
Karāla2 = Śiva, .
Karāla3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Karāla4 = Karālajanaka, .
Karāladanta, a ṛṣi .
Karālajanaka, a king . Janaka, Karāla.
Karālākṣa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Karālī = Durgā, .
Karambhā, daughter of the Kaliṅga king and wife of Akrodhana .
Karaṇa = Yuyutsu, .
Karaṇa, pl name of a caste .
Karaṇa = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Kāraṇa = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Karandhama, an ancient king, grandfather of Marutta . b, .
Kārandhama1, a tīrtha .
Kārandhama2 = Avikṣit, .
Kārapavana, a tīrtha .
Kāraskara, pl a people .
Karasthālin = Śiva .
Karaṭa, pl a people .
Karatoyā, a river . e, . next.
Karatoyinī, a river = Karatoyā. m, .
Kārāvara, name of a caste, .
Karavīra, a serpent .
Karavīrapura, a city. t, .
Kardama1, a serpent .
Kardama2, a Prajāpati . b, .
Kardamila, a sacred place .
Kareṇumatī, daughter of the Cedi king and wife of Nakula Pāṇḍava .
Karīṣaka, pl a people .
Kārīṣi, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Karīṣiṇī, a river .
Karīti, pl a people .
Karkakhaṇḍa, pl a people .
Karkara, a serpent .
Karkoṭaka, a serpent .
Karkoṭaka, pl a people .
Karmakālavid = Śiva .
Karman = Śiva .
Karmin, a son of Śukra .
Karṇa1, son of Sūrya with Kuntī, ated by the Sūta Adhi ratha and his wife Rādhā, and the counsellor of Duryodhana . b K. was born of Kuntī and Sūrya, with his armour and ear rings, . b When Kuntī had thrown her child into the water, it was taken up by the husband of Rādhā and called Vasuṣeṇa. He grew very strong and soon mastered the vedāṅgas there was nothing he would not give to the brahmans. In order to benefit Arjuna, Indra in the guise of a brahman obtained his ear rings and armour, and in return gave him a lance with which he could slay any one amongst gods, Asuras, men, Gandharvas, and Rākṣasas. Because he took off his natural armour and ear rings he was called Vaikartana Karṇa. He was the friend and counsellor of Duryodhana, . c When the exhibition had nearly ended there was heard proceeding from the gate the slapping of arms like to the roar of thunder. Then K. proceeded with his natural mail and ear ring and bowed to Droṇa and Kṛpa. Having spoken disdainfully to Arjuna, at which Duryodhana was filled with delight, he then, with the permission of Droṇa, did all that Arjuna had e before. Duryodhana and his brothers in joy embraced K. K. asked for a single combat with Arjuna, who rebuked him. Droṇa gave his consent to the encounter. Indra covered Arjuna with clouds, while the Sun dispersed the clouds from K who remained visible, surrounded by the rays of the Sun. When Kṛpa asked K. to tell his lineage K. was ashamed, but Duryodhana immediately installed K. king of the Aṅgas . Then Adhiratha entered the lists and embraced K. as his son Bhīmasena, seeing this, scoffed at K. as the son of a charioteer, but was reprimanded by Duryodhana . When the sun went n Duryodhana led K. out of the arena. Kuntī had recognized K. as her son and was pleased at his success. Duryodhana banished his fear of Arjuna when he had obtained Karṇas friendship, . c, hatasya Narakasyātmā Kmūrtim upāśritaḥIndra will take away his ear rings and coat of mail, āviṣṭacittātmā NarakasyāntarātmanāVaikartanaḥ, possessed by Naraka, K. was desirous of slaying Arjunapromised to slay ArjunaKarṇadigvijayaSūtaputrasyaK. subdued the earth for DuryodhanaDuryodhanayajñaadvised Duryodhana to perform the rājasūya, swears that he will slay ArjunaGhoṣayātrāp.SūtaputreṇaDraupadīharaṇap.Kuṇḍalāharaṇap.Sūrya appeared to K. in a dream and dissuaded him from giving away his ear rings and coat of mail when K. refused to break his vow, Sūrya advised him to ask Indra for the dart Amoghācf. Kuṇḍalāḥaraṇap.i.e. Kuntī, Atharvaśirasi śrutaṃ, Page3 b, śukle daśottare pakṣe, the husband of Rādhāonly afterwards he was named K Vāsavī, SūryasambhavaḥĀraṇeyap.Kīcakavadhap.Goharaṇap.recommended to inquire about the PāṇḍavasVaikartanasya, recommended to undertake the expedition for ravishing the cattle of VirāṭaVaikartanaṃpromised to slay ArjunaSūtaputraḥ, in the van of Duryodhanas arrayVaikartanaṃis defeated by ArjunaVaikartanaḥ, on the top of his standard there was the device of an elephants rope, nāgakakṣāArjuna rushed towards K.is defeated by Arjunastupefied by Arjuna, who caused Uttara to bring K.s yellow robes awaypadaṃ padasahasreṇa yaś caran nāparā dhnuyātYudhiṣṭhiraSainyodyogap Śalya promises Yudhiṣṭhira to weaken the energy of K when he becomes his charioteer in the encounter between K. and ArjunaSañjayayānap . ʹ, ʹ, . Vaivasvata, q.v. Vasuṣeṇa, the original name of Karṇa, . Vṛṣa, .
Karṇa2, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Karṇaśravas, a brahman . . . When Duryodhana had come to Hāstinapura, Bhīṣma said to him that, as he had told him before, this journey did not please him, and advised him to make peace with the Pāṇḍavas. Duryodhana laughed and sallied out with Śakuni, followed by Karṇa and Duḥśāsana. When Bhīṣma, ashamed, had gone away, they returned and began to consult. Karṇa complained of the partiality of Bhīṣma for the Pāṇḍavas, and promised to conquer the world for Duryodhana. Duryodhana gladly accepted his offer, and on an auspicious lunar etc Karṇa set out . Karṇa, surrounded by a large army, first made Drupada and the princes that were under him pay tribute. He then successively conquered the north, the east, the south, and the west, with the Mlecchas, the mountaineers, Bhadras, Rohitakas, Āgneyas, Mālavas, Śaśakas, Nagnajit, etc. Having returned to Hāstinapura, he was highly praised by Duryodhana and Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who sat with Gāndhārī .
Karṇanirvāka, a muni .
Karṇaparvan . THE NIGHT AFTER DROṆAS DEATH, AND THE SIXTEENTH MORNING, AND BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE SIXTEENTH AND SEVEN TEENTH DAYS. After Droṇas death the Kuru warriors in grief, with Duryodhana at their head, repaired to Aśvatthāman. When night came they proceeded to their tents, but could not sleep they passed that night together in Duryodhanas tent, reflecting . When morning came they rose and performed their customary rites. Arranging their troops they proceeded to battle, making Karṇa their leader. The Pāṇḍavas also proceeded to battle. Karṇa fought for two days and was then slain by Arjuna. Sañjaya repaired to Hāstinapura and informed Dhṛtarāṣṭra of Karṇas fall. Janamejaya inquired about Dhṛtarāṣṭra and the details of the battle . Vaiśampāyana said After the fall of Karṇa, Sañjaya set out that night for Hāstinapura and spoke with Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Sañjaya related the dis couragement of the Kuru army after the fall of Droṇa Duryo dhanas spirited address Karṇa was made generalissimo but slain by Arjuna on the second day . Hearing of Karṇas fall in battle, Dhṛtarāṣṭra swooned away he and the ladies were restored to their senses Dhṛtarāṣṭra inquired whether Duryodhana was still alive Sañjaya informed him of Duḥśāsanas slaughter . Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya recounted the names of those that had fallen and those that were still alive Dhṛtarāṣṭra once more swooned away . Dhṛtarāṣṭras lament for Karṇa Sañjaya endeavoured to comfort him continuation of Dhṛtarāṣṭras lament . . THE SIXTEENTH DAY After Droṇas fall the Kauravas, having fled and been rallied by Duryodhana, fought for a long time with the Pāṇḍavas . On the approach of the evening twilight the Kauravas retired to their encampment they held a consultation in the night Duryodhana inquired of his counsellors as to what should next be e. Aśvatthāman suggested the installation of Karṇa as generalissimo . Duryodhana offered Karṇa the command, which Karṇa accepted, promising to slay the Pāṇḍavas . Karṇa was installed in the command and blessed by the brahmans, and ordered the troops to be arrayed at the rise of the sun . Beholding Karṇa, none recked the loss of Bhīṣma or Droṇa, etc. He formed a makara array the tip, the two eyes, the head, the neck, the middle, the left foot, the right foot, the left hind foot, the right hind foot, the tail . Yudhiṣṭhira asked Arjuna to array the Pāṇḍava army and slay Karṇa . The Pāṇḍava troops were arrayed in the shape of the half moon the left side, the right side, the middle, the rear Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujas became the protectors of Arjunas chariot wheels, and did not quit him for a moment. Then commenced the battle . A fierce slaughter on both sides . Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc headed by Bhīmasena Kṣemadhūrti, who was slain by Bhīmasena. The Kurus fled away . Nakula Karṇa Bhīmasena Aśvatthāman Sātyaki the Kaikaya princes Vinda and Anuvinda King Citrasena Śrutakarman Prativindhya Citra Duryodhana Yudhiṣṭhira Arjuna the Saṃśaptakas Dhṛṣṭadyumna Kṛpa Śikhaṇḍin Kṛtavarman Śruta kīrti Śalya Sahadeva Duḥśāsana. Anuvinda was slain by Sātyaki, and so was Vinda Sātyaki got upon the chariot of Yudhāmanyu, then upon another chariot the Kaikeyas fled . Śrutakarman the Abhisāra king Citrasena, whom he slew and then he pursued his flying troops. Prativindhya Citra, whom he slew. The Kurus fled only Aśvatthāman Bhīmasena Si Cā and M. ṛ applauded them both were borne away insensible by their drivers . Arjuna the Saṃśaptakas Si . ṛ and Cā. applauded him, etc. Aśvatthāman Arjuna, who fought also the Saṃśaptakas the Kaliṅga, Vaṅga, and Niṣāda heroes attacked Arjuna with a division of elephants, which was broken Kṛṣṇa urged Arjuna not to spare Aśvatthāman, who at last was borne away by his steeds and entered the army of Karṇa Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna proceeded towards the Saṃśaptakas . The Magadha chief Daṇḍadhāra massacred the Pāṇḍava army. Arjuna Daṇḍadhāra, whom he slew his brother Daṇḍa Arjuna, who slew him the hostile force broke up Arjuna proceeded once more against the Saṃśaptakas, whom he slaughtered Ugrāyudhas son Arjuna, who slew him urged by Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna smote the remnant of the Saṃśaptakas, hastening in order to kill Karṇa Kṛṣṇa described the dismal sights of the field of battle for the sake of Duryodhana alone. The army of Duryodhana was defeated by Pāṇḍya, who regarded himself as superior to Bhīṣma, etc and was slaughtering the army of Karṇa, the Pulindas, etc. Aśvatthāman Pāṇḍya, who employed the Vāyavya weapon mean while Karṇa began to rout the elephant force of the Pāṇḍavas Pāṇḍya ascended a riderless elephant and split Aśvatthāmans diadem then Aśvatthāman slew him, who had given numerous steeds, men, and elephants as food to the Rā. Duryodhana and his brothers worshipped Karṇa . Kṛṣṇa said to Arjuna that he did not see Yudhiṣṭhira the Pāṇḍavas had retreated, and Karṇa was slaying the Sṛñjayas. The Kurus the Pāṇḍavas Karṇa caused a great carnage among the Pāṇḍavas, Sṛñjayas, and Pāñcālas. The Pāñcāla chief, etc Karṇa Dhṛṣṭadyumna the Aṅgas, etc. the Pāṇḍavas and the Pāñcālas come to the aid of Dhṛṣṭadyumna Nakula, etc overloaded the elephants with their weapons Sātyaki killed the elephant of the Vaṅga king and felled the rider Sahadeva Puṇḍra, whose elephant he slew, and then proceeded towards the Aṅga chief Nakula the Aṅga king, whom he slew the elephant men of the Aṅgas Mekalas, etc Nakula then the Pāṇḍavas, etc rushed to the rescue of Nakula Sahadeva slew eight elephants and Nakula many Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc overloaded the elephants with arrows the hostile army fled away and the Pāṇḍava warriors rushed against Karṇa . Sahadeva Duḥśāsana, who was taken away by his charioteer Sahadeva crushed Duryodhanas division . Karṇa Nakula both the Somakas and Kurus were greatly afflicted Nakula fled on foot Karṇa pursued him and placed his stringed bow around his neck, but let him escape, recollecting the words of Kuntī Nakula in great shame proceeded towards Yudhiṣṭhiras chariot, which he ascended. Karṇa at noon made a great slaughter among the Pāñśālas and the Sṛñjayas, and pursued them . Ulūka Yuyutsu, who was vanquished and mounted another chariot. Ulūka slaughtered the Pāñcālas and the Sṛñjayas. Śruta karman Śatānīka both were deprived of their chariots and retired Śrutakarman mounted the chariot of Viviṃśa, Śatānīka that of Prativindhya. Śakuni Sutasoma, who was deprived of his chariot, but contended on foot with Śakuni, who fought from his chariot the Si etc were highly pleased Sutasoma went to the chariot of Śrutakīrti Śakuni slew many of the Pāṇḍava army . Kṛpa Dhṛṣṭadyumna, who got bewildered and let his charioteer carry him to Bhīmasena, pursued by Kṛpa. Kṛtavarman Śikhaṇḍin, who fell into a swoon, and was borne away by his charioteer the Pāṇḍava army fled . Arjuna the Trigartas, etc. Arjuna slew king Śatruñ jaya, and Suśrutas son, and Candradeva King Satyasena wounded Kṛṣṇa and was slain by Arjuna, who then slew Citravarman and the Saṃśaptakas in hundreds and thousands, and Mitrasena, and wounded Suśarman all the Saṃśaptakas attacked Arjuna, who invoked the Aindra weapon the hostile army fled away almost entirely . Duryodhana Yudhiṣṭhira, who deprived him of his chariot Karṇa, etc rushed to his aid the other sons of Pāṇḍu surrounded Yudhiṣṭhira the Pāñcālas the Kauravas Karṇa slaughtered the Pāñcālas, Arjuna the Trigartas, Bhīmasena the Kurus and their elephant division, when the sun had passed the meridian Duryo dhana Yudhiṣṭhira Duryodhana swooned away Bhīmasena prevented Yudhiṣṭhira from slaying Duryodhana Kṛtavarman Bhīmasena in the after noon . The Kurus the Pāṇḍava army Karṇa Sātyaki many Kurus came to rescue Karṇa, but fled away before the Pāṇḍavas, who were headed by the sons of Drupada Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa destroyed the Kurus Duryodhana Arjuna Arjuna Aśvatthāman Kṛpa, etc. Sātyaki, etc Karṇa, who vanquished them Arjuna Karṇa many Kurus fled away. At the close of the day both armies withdrew Rā. and Pś etc appeared . Dhṛtarāṣṭra exalted the prowess of Arjuna . The Kurus, in grief, took counsel of one another Karṇa assured Duryodhana that he would slay Arjuna on the morrow. On the morrow they beheld an invincible array formed by Yudhiṣṭhira according to the rules of Bṛhaspati and Uśanas. Duryodhana and his troops put confidence in Karṇa. Dhṛtarāṣṭras grief Sañjaya rebuked him by reminding him of his evil acts . At dawn Karṇa repeated before Duryodhana his pledge to slaughter Arjuna my bow Vijaya is the foremost of all weapons...Arjuna is superior to me only by having Kṛṣṇa for his charioteer, the chariot given him by Agni, his steed, and his standard with the Ape. He desired to have Śalya to drive his chariot Duryodhana solicited Śalya to comply with Karṇas wishes Śalya took offence at the proposal Duryodhana repeated his request in honorific words, and Śalya accepted on the condition that he might in Karṇas presence, utter whatever he desired . Duryodhana related to Śalya Tripurākhyāna, which the great Ṛ. Mārkaṇḍeya had narrated to his father. As Brahmán, ...the Supreme Deity acted as the driver of Rudra, so thou restrain the steeds of Karṇa . He then related a story of Paraśu Rāma, which a virtuous brahman had recited in the presence of his father. Rāma gave the Dhanurveda to Karṇa, whom not think to have been born in the Sūta order, but to be the son of a god, born in the Kṣatriya order and abaned in infancy . Duryodhana said So did Brahman act as Rudras driver the driver should be superior to the warrior thou art selected by us as superior to Karṇa. Śalya said that many a time he had heard this history recited to him, and Kṛṣṇa, knowing the same, had become the charioteer of Arjuna, and would fight if Arjuna were slain. Duryodhana eulogized Karṇa and then Śalya as superior to Kṛṣṇa. Śalya repeated his promise and condition. Duryodhana embraced Karṇa, and, requested by him, once more obtained the promise of Śalya, who embraced Duryodhana and asked their forgiveness for the words he might speak to Karṇa for his good what shall say, in order to inspire thee confidence, is fraught with self adulation am a driver like Mātali himself . Duryodhana said to Karṇa Śalya, who is superior to Kṛṣṇa, will act as a driver, like Mātali to Indra. When the morning came, Duryodhana again successfully asked Śalya to become Karṇas charioteer. Karṇa having worshipped the chariot, they both ascended it. Duryodhana once more addressed Karṇa . Karṇa told Śalya to urge the steeds that he might slay Arjuna, etc. Śalya endeavoured to inspire Karṇa with fear by eulogizing the Pāṇḍavas . When Karṇa set out there appeared ill omens. The Kuru army, however, was filled with joy. Karṇa reflected and boasted . Śalya ridiculed him and praised Arjuna . Karṇa proceeded on his chariot with white steeds and tiger skins, slaying large numbers in battle along his way, and inquired after Arjuna, promising every Pāṇḍava soldier that he met that unto him who pointed out Arjuna to him he would give whatever wealth he desired. Duryodhana and the troops rejoiced Śalya scornfully laughed, and said that Karṇa would get to see Arjuna without the trouble of seeking him, and asked him to aban his desire for a single combat with Arjuna. Karṇa repeated his resolution, and Śalya insulted him in a long speech . Karṇa replied angrily, describing the dis reputable practices of the Madrakas . Śalya answered by praising himself and his accomplishments as a charioteer, and by reciting the story of the crow and the swan Even as that crow, fed upon the remains of the dinners of the Vaiśya children, disregarded his equals and superiors, so t thou, that art fed by the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra upon the remains of their dishes, disregard all, etc. . Karṇa said that Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna were well known to him, but did not make him afraid. The curse, however, of Rāma pained him greatly. He dwelt, disguised as a brahman, with Rāma in former days, desirous of obtaining celestial weapons from him. Indra, as a worm, began to pierce his thigh, on which was lying the head of the sleeping Rāma therefore he did not move. But Rāma, witnessing his patience, discovered that he was not a brahman, and cursed him, saying that this weapon would never, in the time of need, when the hour of his death came, occur to his memory. He had forgotten the weapon, but would, notwithstanding, slay Arjuna he suspected Śalya of secret friendship with the Pāṇḍavas he would employ the Brāhma weapon, which Arjuna would never be able to escape, if only the wheels of Karṇas chariot did not sink into the earth that day he would not take fright at Yama himself with his rod, or Varuṇa with his noose, or Kubera with his mace, or Indra with the thunderbolt. Once upon a time, while wandering for the sake of practising with my bow Vijaya, had heedlessly struck the calf of a brahmans homa cow the brahman cursed me, saying that my wheel would sink into the earth in a battle when was in great danger. The kings of the Lunar race offered to give that brahman, kine and bulls, but in vain, etc. . Karṇa said that it was in vain that Śalya tried to frighten him . Karṇa said that in Dhṛtarāṣṭras abode the brahmans used to give accounts of various delightful regions and many kings of ancient times an old brahman had said, blaming the Madrakas and the Bāhīkas, that they should be avoided as being out of the pale of virtue and living away from Himavat, etc but between Sindhu and its tributary rivers. On some very secret mission Karṇa had to live among the Bāhīkas, and therefore their conduct was well known to him there is a town Śākala, a river Āpagā, and a Bāhīka clan Jarttikas the practices of these people are very censurable . P and brahmans never accept gifts from those that are fallen, or those that are begotten by Śūdras on the girls of other castes, or the Bāhīkas, who never perform sacrifices and are exceedingly irreligious. He mentioned three impure places . There were two Piśācas in the river Vipāśā, named Bahi and Hīka the Bāhīkas are the offspring of those two Pś. they are not creatures created by the Creator. The Kāraṣkaras, etc and other peoples of no religion one should always avoid even thus did a Ṛā. woman speak to a brahman who went to that country for bathing in sacred water and passed a single night there. The regions are called Āraṭṭāḥ, the water Bāhīka the lowest brahmans have resided there from very remote times, without the Vedas, etc. The Prasthalas, etc are almost as blameable in their practices . Karṇa continued his description of the Bāhīkas . The Āraṭṭas had been cursed by a chaste woman. The Kauravas, etc know what the eternal religion is. Brahmán, even in the Kṛta age, had censured the practices of the country of the five rivers. K. quoted a saying of the Rā. Kalmāṣapāda, declared by the Rākṣasa to be the formula for curing a person possessed by a Rā. or killed by poison. Remarks on the Pāñcālas, etc on Agni, etc. . Śalya spoke in dis paragement of the Aṅgas . Duryodhana restored peace between Karṇa and Śalya . THE SEVEN TEENTH DAYS BATTLE. Beholding the array of the Pārthas made by Dhṛṣṭadyumna, Karṇa proceeded to battle and assailed Yudhiṣṭhira. Dhṛtarāṣṭra inquired about the disposition of the Kuru forces . Sañjaya described the Kaurava array right wing on the right of these the left side on their left in the centre at the head Karṇa with his sons in the rear Duḥśāsana and behind him Duryodhana and his brothers, protected by the united Madrakas and Kekayas Aśvatthāman, etc with Mlecchas on elephants followed behind. The array was formed according to the plan of Bṛhaspati. Yudhiṣṭhira, beholding Karṇa, spoke to Arjuna of the hostile array Arjuna should proceed against Karṇa Bhīmasena against Duryodhana Nakula against Vṛṣasena Sahadeva against Śakuni Śatānīka against Duḥśāsana Sātyaki against Kṛtavarman Pāṇḍya against Aśvatthāman Yudhiṣṭhira against Kṛpa the Draupadeyas with Śikhaṇḍin against the rest of the Dhārtarāṣṭras, etc. Śalya pointed out to Karṇa the chariot of Arjuna and various omens, etc. how the Saṃśaptakas threatened to slay Arjuna and the other heroes of the Pāṇḍava army, and he dissuaded him from trying to slay Arjuna. Meanwhile the two armies mingled fiercely in battle . Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sañjaya about Arjuna, the Saṃ śaptakas, and Karṇa. Sañjaya related Arjuna arrayed his troops, headed by Dhṛṣṭadyumna by the side of Dhṛṣṭadyumna the Draupadeyas. Arjuna the Saṃśaptakas. The Pāñcālas, etc the Kurus Kṛpa, etc the Kośalas, etc. the battle became conducive to fame, heaven, and virtue for the kṣatriya, vaiśya, and śūdra heroes that engaged in it. Duryodhana, etc. Karṇa the Pāṇḍavas, etc. Karṇa harassed Yudhiṣṭhira fierce battle between the Kurus and the Sṛñjayas . Dhṛtarāṣṭra inquired about the particulars of Karṇas encounter with Yudhiṣṭhira. Sañjaya related Karṇa attacked the Pāñcālas and made a great slaughter among others he slew the five Pāñcālas Bhānudeva, etc. . The protectors of Karṇas chariot wheels were his sons Suṣeṇa and Satyasena, and his eldest son Vṛṣasena protected his rear. Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc Karṇa Karṇas sons Suṣeṇa Bhīmasena, who pierced him with seventy arrows and then slew Karṇas son Bhānusena Bhīmasena Kṛpa, etc. Bhīmasena Suṣeṇa Karṇa Suṣeṇa Nakula Saha deva Sātyaki Vṛṣasena, who was taken up by Duḥśāsana on the latters chariot, borne away, and caused to ride in another chariot Vṛṣasena the Draupadeyas, etc. Yuyudhāna Duḥśāsana, whom he deprived of his chariot, etc but who got another chariot and fought from within the division of Karṇa Karṇa Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc. at last Karṇas assailants gave way Karṇa Yudhiṣṭhira the Cedis, etc. the Drāviḍas, etc Karṇa, who crushed them Karṇa Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira addressed Karṇa in rage Karṇa swooned away, but recovered and slew Yudhiṣṭhiras wheel protectors, the Pāñcāla princes Candradeva and Daṇḍadhāra Yudhiṣṭhira struck Suṣeṇa and Satyasena, etc. Sātyaki, etc Karṇa, who invoked the Brāhma weapon Karṇa deprived Yudhiṣṭhira of his chariot Yudhiṣṭhira fled, riding in another chariot with the white steeds with black hair on their tails that used to bear him, pursued by Karṇa, who touched him with his hand, but remembered the words of Kuntī and was withheld by Śalya, but insulted Yudhiṣṭhira and let him escape. The Cedis, etc followed Yudhiṣṭhira Karṇa made a great slaughter of the Pāṇḍava forces Yudhiṣṭhira urged his forces to proceed against Karṇa, which they did, headed by Bhīmasena the Kurus broke and fled away . Duryodhana in vain tried to stop the flying troops. Then Śakuni, etc. Karṇa Bhīmasena, who let Sātyaki and Dhṛṣṭadyumna protect Yudhiṣṭhira Śalya pointed out Bhīma to Karṇa Karṇa replied Karṇa swooned and was brought away by Śalya . Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related Urged by Duryodhana, several Kuru leaders assailed Bhīma, who slew, among others, six sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . The other sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra fled away. Karṇa Bhīmasena, whom he deprived of his chariot, but who then with his mace killed elephants and men by hundreds, among others fifty two elephants belonging to Śakuni next, horsemen dispatched by Śakuni, then he mounted another chariot and proceeded against Karṇa. Karṇa Yudhiṣṭhira, whom he pursued as he was flying away Bhīmasena Karṇa Sātyaki Karṇa. Beholding Śakuni, etc the Kurus rallied when the sun had reached the meridian. Fierce battle . Arjuna the Saṃśaptakas, etc. Arjuna Suśarman Arjuna repeatedly invoked the Nāga weapon, paralysing the legs of the Saṃśaptakas Suśarman invoked the Sauparṇa weapon birds came n and devoured the snakes Arjuna sat n, recovered, and invoked the Aindra weapon the battle became awful . Kṛtavarman, etc began a fierce battle Kṛpa Śikhaṇḍin Śikhaṇḍin was deprived of his chariot and made inactive Dḥrṣṭadyumna proceeded against Kṛpa Kṛtavarman Dhṛṣṭadyumna Aśvatthāman Yudhi ṣṭhira Duryo dhana Nakula and Sahadeva Karṇa Bhīmasena, etc. Kṛpa Śikhaṇḍin Suketu Kṛpa Śikhaṇḍin retreated Kṛpa slew Suketu, whose troops fled away Kṛtavarman Dhṛṣṭadyumna, who made him driverless and was assailed by the Kurus . Aśva tthāman Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. Prativindhya, etc Aśvatthāman Sātyaki had his driver slain Yudhiṣṭhira went away, leaving his division, against the Kurus Aśvatthāman also left the spot . Karṇa Bhīmasena, etc who, avoiding Karṇa, proceeded against the Kurus Arjuna the Saṃśaptakas Bhīmasena the Kauravas Karṇa the Pāñcālas Duryodhana Nakula and Sahadeva Dhṛṣṭadyumna Duryodhana, who was rescued by his brothers and borne away by Daṇḍadhāra upon the latters chariot. Karṇa Dhṛṣṭadyumna Sātyaki the Pāñcālas a fierce battle between the two armies when the sun had ascended the meridian Karṇa Vyāghraketu, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira, etc Karṇa. Bhīmasena slew the Kurus Bāhlīkas, etc. . Arjuna addressed Kṛṣṇa upon beholding Karṇas prowess, and seeing that the Saṃśaptakas were broken. Arjuna broke through the Kuru host. Duryodhana once more urged the Saṃśaptakas against him. Having slain, kṣatriyas, Arjuna came to the further wing of the Saṃśaptakas, which was protected by the Kāmbojas the younger brother of the Kāmboja chief Sudakṣiṇa was killed by Arjuna the Kāmbojas, etc were slain. Aśvatthāman Arjuna Si. and Cā. came Kṛṣṇa urged Arjuna not to spare Aśva tthāman, who swooned and was carried away by his driver Arjuna slew the Kuru troops. Arjuna had routed the Saṃśaptakas, Bhīmasena the Kurus, Karṇa the Pāñcālas. Yudhiṣṭhira, pained by his wounds, had retreated a krośa . Duryodhana addressed the Kuru leaders . Aśvatthāman swore to slay Dhṛṣṭadyumna or not to f his armour . A fierce battle commenced. Aps etc came Aps. rained flowers, etc on the combatants . Arjuna pointed out to Kṛṣṇa that the Pāṇḍava army was flying away, Karṇa slaying their warriors, and Yudhiṣṭhira nowhere to be seen the third part of the day still remains. Arjuna proceeded to Yudhiṣṭhira Kṛṣṇa described the field of battle to Arjuna . A terrible battle commenced . The Kurus the Sṛñjayas a remnant only of the Saṃśaptakas were left alive. Dhṛṣṭadyumna the Pāṇḍavas Karṇa Sātyaki Karṇa Aśvatthāman Dhṛṣṭa dyumna Karṇa the Pāñcālas, etc. Dhṛṣṭadyumna was worsted by Aśvatthāman and rescued by Arjuna Arjuna Aśvatthāman Dhṛṣṭadyumna was brought away by Sahadeva on the latters chariot Aśva tthāman swooned on his chariot and was carried away by his driver. Arjuna proceeded to wards the Saṃśaptakas . Kṛṣṇa pointed out to Arjuna that Yudhiṣṭhira was being pursued by many Dhārtarāṣṭras, headed by Duryodhana, while the Pāñcālas were following in order to rescue him, and that he was in great danger, though the Kurus had been checked by Sātyaki and Bhīma, because Duryodhana, etc would break n the very mountains Yudhi ṣṭhira is exceedingly emaciated in consequence of his fastings he is endued with Brāhma force, but not with much of kṣatriya might he was surrounded by the Dhārtarāṣṭra warriors with the weapons Sthūṇākarṇa, etc. in the very sight of the twins, etc Karṇa was destroying the Pāṇḍava division, and rushing against Bhīmasena having vanquished the Pāñcālas, etc he would soon come against Arjuna, and he was protected by Duryodhana he should be slain Karṇa was rushing against Dhṛṣṭadyumna in order to exterminate the Pāñśālas however, Yudhiṣṭhira was living Bhīma and the Pāñcālas were now conquering the Kauravas, who were flying away, Kṛpa and Karṇa, etc resisting the Pāñcālas the Niṣāda prince was slain by Bhīma, who had checked three akṣauhiṇīs of Duryodhanas soldiers. Arjuna then destroyed the remnant of his foes the Saṃśaptakas fled . Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related Karṇa, etc Bhīmasena the Pāṇḍavas, etc. Śikhaṇḍin Karṇa Dhṛṣṭa dyumna Duḥśāsana Nakula Vṛṣasena Yudhiṣṭhira Citrasena Sahadeva Ulūka Sātyaki Śakuni the Draupadeyas the other Kauravas Aśvatthāman Arjuna Kṛpa Yudhāmanyu Kṛtavarman Uttamaujas Śikhaṇḍin was deprived of his chariot by Karṇa and retreated Dhṛṣṭadyumna Duḥśā sana Si. and Aps etc wondered. Karṇa endeavours to rally the retreating troops of the Dhārtarāṣṭras. After Karṇa had gone away, Nakula proceeded against the Kauravas Karṇas son, avoiding Nakula, went to Karṇa in order to protect his chariot wheel. Ulūka was made driverless by Sahadeva and entered the division of the Trigartas. Śakuni ascended the chariot of Ulūka, who took him away from Sātyaki, who then routed the Kuru army. Duryodhana Bhīmasena, who deprived him of his chariot and bow and made him fly away the whole Kuru army attacked Bhīmasena, who scattered them. Yudhāmanyu retreated on his chariot, driving it himself. Uttamaujas sat n and was taken away by his driver. The whole Kuru army attacked Bhīmasena Duḥśāsana and Śakuni Bhīmasena, who made Duryodhana fly away, invoked his celestial weapons, and scattered and destroyed them . Arjuna appeared. Duryodhana Yudhiṣṭhira, whose warriors then came to rescue him with an akṣauhiṇī Karṇa checked them all Sahadeva Duryodhana Karṇa began an onslaught on the troops of Yudhiṣṭhira and Dhṛṣṭadyumna they fled away Karṇa Yudhiṣṭhira, who sat n and ordered his driver to retreat Duryodhana and the Dhārta rāṣṭras pursued him but, Kekaya troops and a body of Pāñcāla troops checked them. Duryodhana Bhīma . Karṇa the Kaikayas, who fled to Bhīmasena. Karṇa Yudhiṣṭhira Nakula and Sahadeva Karṇa, who slew the steeds both of Yudhiṣṭhira and Nakula, who both ascended the chariot of Sahadeva Śalya, in order to rescue them, exhorted Karṇa to fight with Arjuna, but in vain Yudhiṣṭhira turned from the battle Śalya once more reminded Karṇa of Arjuna, etc and that Duryodhana was in danger from Bhīmasena. Karṇa then left Yudhiṣṭhira and the twins and rushed to the rescue of Duryodhana. Yudhiṣṭhira in shame retreated with the steeds of Sahadeva, with the twins, whom he then dispatched to Bhīma . Aśvatthāman Arjuna Aśvatthāman employed the Aindra weapon, which Arjuna baffled with a powerful weapon created by Indra Aśvatthāman, having had his driver slain, himself guided his steeds while he fought with Arjuna then he was brought away by his steeds. The Pāṇḍavas, repeatedly charging the Kauravas, broke their ranks and caused them to fly away in the very sight of Dhṛtarāṣṭras sons, etc. . Duryodhana caused Karṇa to rally the troops Karṇa, employing the Bhārgava weapon, harassed the Pāñcālas, who, with the Cedis, began to lose their senses. The Sṛñjayas called upon Arjuna and Vāsudeva. Arjuna spoke to Kṛṣṇa about Karṇa Kṛṣṇa reminded him first to seek Yudhiṣṭhira . Arjuna met with Bhīma and asked him to bring intelligence of Yudhiṣṭhira Bhīma feared to incur the reproach of cowardice by leaving the battle Arjuna went to Yudhiṣṭhira in the Pāṇḍava camp upon Bhīma agreeing to resist the Saṃ śaptakas. Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa found Yudhiṣṭhira lying on his bed thinking that Karṇa had been slain, Yudhiṣṭhira congratulated them . Arjuna told Yudhiṣṭhira the real motive of his arrival in camp, and swore to slay Karṇa and all the foes that very day . Yudhiṣṭhira censured Arjuna, thinking that he had run away from the battle, leaving Bhīma unsupported, several times invoking him to give up Gāṇḍīva to somebody else . Arjuna drew his sword in order to strike off Yudhiṣṭhiras head in fulfilment of his vow about the person who would tell him to give up Gāṇḍīva Kṛṣṇa addressed Arjuna on the nature of truth, relating the story of Balāka and of Kauśika Arjuna said he must keep his vow Kṛṣṇa suggested that Arjuna by insulting Yudhiṣṭhira, by addressing him as thou, would be regarded as having slain him . Urged by Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna insulted Yudhiṣṭhira in a long speech then he became despondent and desired to strike off his own head Kṛṣṇa urged him to utter his own praises, as self praise is equal to self destruction. Arjuna praised himself, and begged for Yudhiṣṭhiras forgiveness, promising to slay Karṇa and rescue Bhīma. Yudhiṣṭhira grieved, saying that Bhīmasena, not he, ought to be king. Kṛṣṇa comforted Yudhiṣṭhira and induced him to forgive both himself and Arjuna . Speeches of Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna, and Yudhiṣṭhira on the same topic . Arjuna proceeded to slay Karṇa, having obtained Yudhiṣṭhiras leave commanded by Kṛṣṇa, Dāruka had equipped the chariot. Auspicious omens. Kṛṣṇa addressed Arjuna in order to raise his spirits continuation . Arjunas cheerful reply to Kṛṣṇa . Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related Description of the battle Arjuna slew many. Kṛpa Śikhaṇḍin Sātyaki Duryodhana Śrutaśravas Aśva tthāman Yudhāmanyu Citrasena the Sṛñjaya Uttamaujas Karṇas son Suṣeṇa Sahadeva the Gāndhāra king Śakuni Nakulas son Śatānīka Karṇas son Vṛṣasena Nakula Kṛtavarman the Pāñcāla king Dhṛṣṭadyumna Karṇa Duḥśāsana Bhīma. Uttamaujas slew Suṣeṇa. Karṇa Uttamaujas, who had his steeds slain, slew the steeds of Kṛpa, etc and ascended the chariot of Śikhaṇḍin. Śikhaṇḍin did not wish to strike Kṛpa while the latter had no chariot Aśvatthāman rescued Kṛpa. Bhīma scorched the Kuru troops with his arrows . The Bharata host fled before Bhīma, who said to his charioteer Viśoka that he was anxious about Arjuna and Yudhiṣṭhira requested by Bhīma, Viśoka took an estimate of his weapons. Bhīma once more addressed Viśoka, saying that he would that day slay all the Kurus or himself succumb, etc. . Viśoka pointed out to Bhīma that Arjuna was returning to battle . Bhīma promised to give Viśoka fourteen villages, female slaves, and twenty chariots for this agreeable intelligence . Arjuna and Bhīma attacked the Kaurava army with great vigour . Duryodhana told his troops to slay Bhīma, who made a formidable carnage among them . Śakuni his brothers Bhīma Śakuni was brought away by Duryodhana, who retreated the troops fled away to Karṇa . Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related In the afternoon Karṇa assailed the Somakas, and Bhīma the Dhārtarāṣṭra troops. Karṇa assailed the Pāñcālas, etc. the Pāṇḍavas encompassed him on all sides Śikhaṇḍin, etc Karṇa, who vanquished them. Cedis and Matsyas Karṇa, who checked them Si and Cā. were gratified the Pāṇḍava troops fled, and were attacked by the Dhārtarāṣṭra archers. Duryodhana rejoiced Duryodhana, etc slew the Pāṇḍava warriors similarly the Pāṇḍava heroes Dhṛṣṭa dyumna, etc made an onslaught on the Kurus . Arjuna produced a river of blood . Requested by Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa took him to Karṇa, whom Śalya informed, and who answered Śalya . Requested by Karṇa, Duryodhana, etc in order to open up a path for Karṇa to Arjuna, speedily proceeded and attacked Arjuna, who caused a great onslaught Aśvatthāman Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman Arjuna, who vanquished them. Śikhaṇḍin, etc proceeding towards Arjuna, checked the foes the Kurus and Sṛñjayas slew one another . Arjuna proceeded to the rescue of Bhīma and slew the assailants of Bhīma the Kurus fled Arjuna informed Bhīma that Yudhiṣṭhira was well, and then proceeded he was surrounded by ten sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, whom he slew . Arjuna was assailed by ninety Saṃśaptakas as he was proceeding towards Karṇas chariot he slew them. Many Kauravas attacked him, whom he destroyed. Then he was attacked by a force of Mlecchas, riding, elephants, commanded by Duryodhana. Arjuna made a heavy onslaught. Abaning the small remnant of Kauravas, Bhīmasena rushed towards Arjuna and also destroyed this remnant then he followed Arjuna in his rear Karṇa was deserted by his troops the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra repaired to Karṇa. Karṇa attacked the Pāñcālas Karṇa felled Janamejayas driver and steeds, and cut off the bows of Śatānīka and Sutasoma Karṇa Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc. Ugrakarman Karṇas son Prasena Karṇa slew Ugrakarman Prasena Sātyaki, who slew him Karṇa Sātyaki Śikhaṇḍin Karṇa slew Dhṛṣṭadyumnas son and attacked Sutasoma. Kṛṣṇa urged Arjuna to slay Karṇa Arjuna proceeded with Bhīmasena Uttamaujas, etc Karṇa, who vanquished them they were rescued by the Draupadeyas Sātyaki Duryo dhana Kṛpa, etc. Duḥśāsana Bhīma . Bhīma slew Duḥśāsana and drank his blood in the very sight of Duryodhana and Karṇa the bystanders, with Karṇas brother Citrasena, fled away, thinking Bhīma to be a Rā. Yudhāmanyu, etc pursued Citrasena Citrasena was slain by him Karṇa Nakula Bhīmasena took up a little of Duḥśāsanas blood and drank it, addressing Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna and vowing soon to slay Duryodhana . Ten of Dhṛtarāṣṭras sons Bhīma, who slew them. Karṇa was afraid, but was encouraged by Śalya . Karṇas son Vṛṣasena Bhīma Nakula, who had his white steeds of the Vanāyu breed slain by him, and sprang upon Bhīmas chariot in the sight of Arjuna urged by Bhīma and Nakula, Arjuna proceeded towards Vṛṣasena . Eleven warriors the Kulindas Kṛtavarman, etc. the Kulinda prince Kṛpa, who slew him the younger brother of the Kulinda prince Kṛpa the Gāndhāra king, who slew the Kulinda the Kurus the Pāṇḍus Sṛñjayas the Bhoja chief Kṛtavarman Śatānīka Aśvatthāman slew three elephants the third brother of the Kulinda chief Duryodhana the Kulinda, mounting another elephant, Krātha, who was slain Vṛka the same Kulinda, whose elephant crushed him the son of Babhru the same elephant Sahadevas son Babhru fell n the same Kulinda Śakuni, who slew him Nakulas son Śatānīka a Kulinda warrior, who was slain by him Karṇas son Vṛṣasena Śatānīka Arjuna, etc. Arjuna, informing Karṇa and all the other Kurus headed by Duryodhana and Aśvatthāman that he would slay Vṛṣasena and then Karṇa, as Bhīma would slay Duryodhana, slew Vṛṣasena Karṇa Arjuna Kṛṣṇa addressed Arjuna Arjunas reply description of Arjuna and Karṇa all the inhabitants of the world were heard to differ amongst themselves Dā G Pś the Snakes, Rā. As Yātudhānas, Gh etc sided with Karṇa the Vedas, etc with Arjuna the smaller snakes all sided with Karṇa M Sā R . A Agni, etc sided with Arjuna, while all Ā. sided with Karṇa the Vaiśyas, etc sided with Karṇa P etc with Arjuna the Pretas, Pś Rā etc with Karṇa . ṛ B. ṛ R. ṛ. with Arjuna, as also G. headed by Tumburu. With the Prādheyas and Mauneyas, G. and Aps and many wise sages, having for their vehicles wolves, etc came in order to witness the encounter that was also witnessed by Dā G N Y etc M. ṛ P etc and Brahmán with B. ṛ. and Prajāpatis and Bhava. Indra wished that Arjuna should vanquish Karṇa Sūrya that Karṇa should vanquish Arjuna. The gods urged Brahmán that the success of both should be equal, Indra that Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa should win Brahmán and Iśāna said that the victory of Arjuna was certain let Karṇa obtain identity with . or M. let him with Droṇa and Bhīṣma be worshipped in heaven. Indra acquiesced in their words. Description of Karṇas and Arjunas chariots. The ape on Arjunas banner attacked the elephants rope on Karṇas banner. Kṛṣṇa and Śalya cast keen glances at each other, and so did Arjuna and Karṇa. Karṇa asked Śalya what he would if he was slain Śalya said that then he would slay both Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna similarly asked by Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa said that Karṇa could not slay Arjuna if so, the destruction of the universe would be at hand, and he would himself slay Karṇa and Śalya. Arjuna said that that very day the wives of Karṇa would become wis . In the welkin N As Si Y G Rā Aps B. ṛ etc looked on. The battle commenced. Duryodhana, etc Arjuna Arjuna defeated all of them floral showers fell, etc. Aśvatthāman told Duryodhana to make peace, but in vain Duryo dhana urged his troops description of the battle between Arjuna and Karṇa Arjuna employed an Āgneya weapon, which was quenched by Karṇa with a Vāruṇa weapon by means of clouds, which Arjuna dispelled by a Vāyavya weapon Arjuna employed the Aindra weapon, Karṇa the Bhārgava weapon. The Pāñcālas and Somakas Karṇa, who slew them. Seeing Arjunas weapons baffled by Karṇa, Bhīma urged Arjuna to put forth his strength, and so did Kṛṣṇa . Arjuna bowed to Brahmán and invoked the Brāhma weapon, which could be applied by the wind alone Karṇa baffled it urged by Bhīma, Arjuna applied a second Brāhma weapon, which caused a great carnage among the Kaurava troops . Karṇa Bhīmasena, etc. . Arjuna shot at Karṇa and Śalya, and slew Sabhāpati, etc. The Kauravas urged Karṇa to slay Arjuna. Yudhiṣṭhira appeared in order to witness the encounter. Arjunas bow string broke Karṇa took advantage of the interval to hit Arjuna, etc. . Karṇa employed as arrows five snakes that had sided with Takṣakas son they penetrated Kṛṣṇas body, entered the earth, and, having bathed, returned to Karṇa, but were cut off by Arjuna, who then covered Karṇas chariot with showers of arrows and slew, Kurus, who had been urged by Duryodhana to fight. The Kurus fled, leaving Karṇa to fight singly with Arjuna . Karṇa baffled Arjunas weapon Karṇa and Arjuna shot at each other dense showers of arrows. The snake Aśvasena, who was hostile to Arjuna, was passing his time in the nether region, having escaped from the conflagration at Khāṇḍava recollecting the death of his mother he now soared up and entered into Karṇas quiver in the shape of an arrow. Karṇa and Arjuna were fanned and sprinkled with fragrant sandal water by many Aps. staying in the welkin, and Śakra and Sūrya with their hands gently brushed their faces. Karṇa aimed that arrow, born in Airāvatas race, which he had long kept for Arjunas destruction, and which lay singly in a golden quiver amid sandal dust omens appeared, and the Lokapālas with Śakra raised loud wails. Karṇa did not know that the snake Aśvasena had entered his arrow by the aid of his yoga powers. Śalya in vain exhorted Karṇa to take another arrow Karṇa said Karṇa never aims an arrow twice persons like us never become crooked warriors. Kṛṣṇa with his feet pressed Arjunas chariot about a cubit into the earth, and the snake arrow, failing to strike off Arjunas head, broke his diadem, incapable of being crushed by Rudra, etc. . Celestial flowers were showered upon Kṛṣṇa, etc. Aśvasena appeared to Karṇa and asked him to shoot the same weapon again Karṇa refused to avail himself of anothers help or shoot the same shaft twice. Aśvasena then, of his own accord, rushed on Arjuna in the shape of an arrow Kṛṣṇa informed Arjuna that it was Aśvasena, who, as an unborn child, was saved with his mother at Khāṇḍava. Arjuna cut the snake into pieces, and Krṣṇa with his arms raised the chariot from the earth. Once, when Karṇa was stupefied and stood inactive, Arjuna was disinclined to slay him in such distress, but he was taught by Kṛṣṇa never to spare an enemy, however weak. At that time, when the hour of Karṇas death had come, Kāla, approaching invisibly, in consequence of the brahmans wrath, said the earth is swallowing up thy wheel, and the weapon that Rāma had given him escaped from his memory, and the earth engulfed his left wheel. Karṇa began to rail at righteousness as not always protecting its worshippers. Karṇa invoked the Brāhma weapon, and Arjuna the Aindra weapon, which was baffled by Karṇa urged by Kṛṣṇa to shoot high weapons, Arjuna shot the Brāhma weapon. Karṇa cut off, one after another, eleven bowstrings of Arjunas, not knowing that Arjuna had one hundred strings to his bow urged by Kṛṣṇa to strike Karṇa with superior weapons, Arjuna then consecrated another celestial weapon with mantras, uniting the Raudra weapon with it. At that time the earth swallowed up one of Karṇas wheels. Quickly alighting, Karṇa seized his sunken wheel with his two arms and endeavoured to lift it up the earth rose up to the height of four fingers breadth, with her seven islands, etc. Karṇa shed tears from wrath and asked Arjuna to wait for a moment till he had lifted his sunken wheel . Kṛṣṇa taunted Karṇa for appealing to virtue and the rules of fair fight by reminding him of all the wrongs e to the Pāṇḍavas by himself. and Duryodhana acting according to his counsels . Karṇa dropped his head in shame and gave no answer, and continued to fight. Kṛṣṇa urged Arjuna to pierce Karṇa with a celestial weapon Arjuna, remembering the incidents alluded to by Kṛṣṇa, blazed up with fury blazing flames of fire seemed to emanate from all the pores of his body, a sight that appeared exceedingly wonderful. Both Karṇa and Arjuna invoked the Brāhma weapon, and Karṇa once more made an effort to extricate his chariot. Arjuna shot an Agni weapon, quenched by Karṇa with a Vāruṇa weapon, covering all the points of the compass with darkness, which Arjuna dispelled with the Vāyavya weapon. Pierced by a shaft of Karṇas, while the earth trembled, etc Arjuna began to reel, the Gāṇḍīva dropped from his hand, etc. At the interval Karṇa fruitlessly endeavoured to extricate his chariot. Recovering his senses, Arjuna took up an añjalika weapon. Urged by Kṛṣṇa to cut off the head of Karṇa, Arjuna cut off his standard, and then, with an añjalika weapon, struck off Karṇas head before Karṇa could mount his chariot. A light issued from Karṇas body and entered the Sun. The Pāṇḍavas rejoiced . Duryodhana, etc grieved Bhīma, uttering loud roars, frightened the Kauravas, etc. . Śalya informed Duryodhana of Karṇas death . Duryodhana became almost deprived of his senses . Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related the state of the Kaurava army after Karṇas fall . Duryodhana resolved to make a final stand . Bhīmasena and Dhṛṣṭadyumna Duryodhana Arjuna the chariot force of the Kauravas Nakula, etc Śakuni the Kurus fled away Cekitāna, etc blew their conches. Duryodhana challenged all the Pāṇḍavas and fought with them with great valour he rallied the remnants of his troops and exhorted them to fight they fled away heedless of his words . Śalya described to Duryodhana the carnage on the field, and urged the withdrawal of the troops to their nightly quarters. Having repeatedly comforted Duryodhana, they retired headed by Aśvatthāman. Karṇa did not lose his splenr. Ṛ etc retired. The portents that were seen at Karṇas fall. Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa blew their conches, at which the Kauravas left the field, deserting Śalya and Duryodhana. G men, Cā M. ṛ Y and M. U. congratulated Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna . Enumeration of the Kauravas retiring from the field . Urged by Kṛṣṇa, who told Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc to stand there with care, Arjuna presented himself to Yudhiṣṭhira, who, rising from his bed, greeted Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa congratulated Yudhiṣṭhira, who ascribed his success to Kṛṣṇas influence . Yudhiṣṭhira, with Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, came back to the field to have a look at Karṇas body. The kings, filled with joy, approached Yudhiṣṭhira and gladdened him greatly so Nakula, etc. . Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Gāndhārī swooned away and were comforted by Vidura, Sañjaya, and the Kuru ladies. The fruits of reciting the Karṇaparvan, as also of hearing it recited, . c, .
Karṇaprāvaraṇa, pl a people .
Karṇaprāvaraṇā, a mātṛ. u, .
Karṇaputra1 = Vṛṣasena, . Karṇasuta, Karṇātmaja, Kārṇi.
Karṇaputra2 = Bhānusena, . Karṇasuta.
Karṇaputra3 = Prasena, . Karṇātmaja.
Karṇaputra4 = Suṣeṇa, . Karṇātmaja.
Kārṇaputra, dual. and pl. .
. Karṇas birth, etc. Indras asking for his natural armour .
Karṇasuta1 = Vṛṣasena, . Karṇaputra, Karṇātmaja, Kārṇi.
Karṇasuta2 = Bhānusena, . Karṇaputra.
Karṇasuta, dual. .
Karṇāṭa, .
Karṇāṭaka, pl a people .
Karṇātmaja1 = Vṛṣasena, . Karṇaputra, Karṇasuta, Kārṇi.
Karṇātmaja2 = Satyasandha, .
Karṇātmaja3 = Suṣeṇa, . Karṇaputra.
Karṇātmaja4 = Prasena, . Karṇaputra.
Karṇaveṣṭa, a prince .
Kārṇi = Vṛṣasena, . Karṇaputra, Karṇasuta, Karṇātmaja.
Karṇikā, an Apsaras .
Karṇikāradhvaja = Abhimanyu, .
Karṇikāramahāsragvin = Śiva .
Karṇikārasrajapriya = Śiva .
Karoṭaka, a serpent .
Karpaṭa, v. Pañcakarpaṭa.
Kārṣṇa, adj. .
Kārṣṇi1, a Devagandharva .
Kārṣṇi2 = Pradyumna, .
Kārṣṇi3 = Abhimanyu, .
Kārṣṇi4 = Śuka, .
Kārtasvara, a Daitya . b, .
Kārtavīrya = Arjuna, the Haihaya king, bis, .
Kārtayuga, adj. . b, .
Kartṛ, a Viśvadeva .
Kartṛ = Śiva .
Kartṛ = Viṣṇu, .
Kārttika, name of a month . Kaumuda.
Kārttikeya = Skanda, q.v.
. At the request of Yudhiṣṭhira, Mārkaṇḍeya enumerated the names of Skanda . Blessing to the reader. Mārkaṇḍeya praised Skanda . Blessing to the reader, etc. .
Kārttikī, the day of full moon in the month of Kārttika . b, . Kaumudī.
Karuṇānvita = Sūrya, .
Karūṣa, pl a people. d, . b, . . Kārūṣa, pl.
Karūṣa1, .
Karūṣa2, an ancient king . Kārūṣa1.
Kārūṣa1, son of Manu Vaivasvata .
Kārūṣa2 .
Kārūṣa3, the country of the Karūṣas .
Kārūṣa, pl a people = Karūṣa, pl ʹ, .
Karūṣādhipati . Cf next.
Kārūṣādhipati . the prec.
Karūṣaka, adj. . next.
Kārūṣaka, adj. .
Karūṣarāja .
Karvaṭa, pl a people .
Kārya = Śiva .
Kāryātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Kaserumat, a Yavana king. b, .
Kāṣṭha, .
kāṣṭhāḥ, pl. . u, .
kāṣṭhāḥ = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva .
Kaṭakaṭa = Śiva .
Kaṭaṅkaṭa = Śiva .
Kaṭha, a ṛṣi . c, .
Kaṭhaka, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kathita = Viṣṇu .
Kaṭirā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kātyāyanī = Durgā, .
Kaubera, adj. . u, . x, . b, .
Kauberya, adj. .
Kauśala, v. Kosala.
Kauśala, pl v. Kosala, pl.
Kauśalya, Kauśalya, pl Kauśalyā, Kauśalyā nandavardhana, Kauśalyānandivardhana, Kauśalyāmatṛ, Kauśalyātmajā, v. Kaus.
Kauśija, pl a people .
Kauśika1 = Viśvāmitra, .
Kauśika2 = Aṣṭaka, .
Kauśika3 = Gādhi, .
Kauśika4 = Caṇḍakauśika, .
Kauśika5 = Indra, .
Kauśika, various brahmans, descendants of Kuśika . g An ascetic K. lived near a village where many rivers met. He made a vow always to speak the truth, and became celebrated as a speaker of truth. From fear of robbers, certain persons entered that wood. The robbers came and asked K. by which path the men had gone, and he told them the truth the robbers finding out the persons slew them all. K. fell into a grievous hell, . b, .
Kauśika7, the senāpati of Jarāsandha .
Kauśika8, v. Kauśikī.
Kauśika, adj. . b, .
Kauśika, pl. .
Kauśikācārya = Ākṛti, .
Kauśikī, a river . c, . b, . m, . b, . Pārā.
Kauśikī = Durgā, .
Kaukulikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kaukura, pl a people = Kukura, pl .
Kaukuṭṭaka, pl a people .
Kaumāra, adj. . u, .
Kaumāra, name of a varṣa in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Kaumodaki, name of the mace of Kṛṣṇa .
Kaumuda, name of a month = Kārttika .
Kaumudī, the day of full moon in the month of Kaumuda .
Kauṇakutsya, a ṛṣi .
Kauṇapa1, a serpent . Do. pl. = Rākṣasa, pl .
Kauṇapāśana, a serpent .
Kauṇḍinya, a muni .
Kauṇḍīvṛṣa, pl a people .
Kauṅkaṇa, pl a people .
Kaunteya1 = Arjuna, .
Kaunteya2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kaunteya3 = Karṇa, .
Kaunteya4 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kaunteya, pl. and dual, .
Kaurava, adj .
Kaurava, pl .
Kaurava1 = Arjuna, .
Kaurava2 = Babhruvāhana, .
Kaurava3 = Bhīmasena, .
Kaurava4 = Bhīṣma, .
Kaurava5 = Bhūri, .
Kaurava6 = Bhūriśravas .
Kaurava7 = Śatānīka3, .
Kaurava8 = Śāntanu, .
Kaurava9 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kaurava1 = Duḥśāsana, .
Kaurava1 = Durmukha, .
Kaurava1 = Duryodhana, .
Kaurava1 = Janamejaya, .
Kaurava1 = Pāṇḍu, .
Kaurava1 = Somadatta, .
Kaurava1 = Suhotra, .
Kaurava1 = Vicitravīrya, .
Kaurava1 = Vidura, .
Kaurava1 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kaurava2 = Yuyutsu, .
Kauravaśārdūla = Janamejaya, .
Kauravācāryamukhya = Droṇa, .
Kauravaśreṣṭha1 = Arjuna, .
Kauravaśreṣṭha2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kauravaśreṣṭha3 = Śreṇimat, .
Kauravaśreṣṭha4 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kauravaśreṣṭha5 = Duryodhana, .
Kauravaśreṣṭha6 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kauravadāyāda = Bhūriśravas, .
Kauravādhama1 = Bāhlīka, .
Kauravādhama2 = Bhīṣma, .
Kauravāgrya1 = Bhīṣma, .
Kauravāgrya2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kauravanandana1 = Arjuna, .
Kauravanandana2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kauravanandana3 = Bhīṣma, .
Kauravanandana4 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kauravanandana5 = Duryodhana, .
Kauravanandana6 = Janamejaya, .
Kauravanandana7 = Pāṇḍu, .
Kauravanandana8 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kauravanandana, pl. = the sons of Pāṇḍu, .
Kauravanātha = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kauravarāja = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kauravarājapatnī = Draupadī, .
Kauravarājaputra = Arjuna, .
Kauravarṣabha1 = Arjuna, .
Kauravarṣabha2 = Pāṇḍu, .
Kauravarṣabha3 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kauravasattama1 = Arjuna, .
Kauravasattama2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kauravātmaja = Duryodhana, .
Kauravavaṃśabhṛt = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kauravavaṃśavardhana = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kauravendra1 = Bāhlīka, .
Kauravendra2 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kauravendra3 = Duryodhana, .
Kauravendra4 = Janamejaya, .
Kauravendra5 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kauraveya, pl. = Kaurava, pl .
Kauraveya1 = Arjuna, .
Kauraveya2 = Bhūriśravas, .
Kauraveya3 = Duryodhana, .
Kauraveya4 = Somadatta, .
Kauraveya, adj .
Kauravī = Ulūpī, .
Kauravya, a serpent .
Kauravya, pl. = Kaurava, pl .
Kauravya1 = Arjuna, .
Kauravya2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kauravya3 = Bhīṣma, .
Kauravya4 = Bhūriśravas, .
Kauravya5 = Bṛhadbala, .
Kauravya6 = Śāntanu, .
Kauravya7 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kauravya8 = Duḥśāsana, .
Kauravya9 = Duryodhana, .
Kauravya1 = Janamejaya, .
Kauravya1 = Jayatsena4, .
Kauravya1 = Pāṇḍu, .
Kauravya1 = Sahadeva, .
Kauravya1 = Somadatta, .
Kauravya1 = Suhotra, .
Kauravya1 = Vicitravīrya, .
Kauravya1 = Yudhiṣṭhira
Kauravya1 = Yuyutsu, .
Kauravyadāyāda = Pāṇḍu, .
Kauravyaduhitṛ = Ulūpī, .
Kauravyakulanandinī = Ulūpī, .
Kauravyamukhya = Bhūriśravas, .
Kauravyapatnī = Kuntī, .
Kausalya1 = Bṛhadbala, .
Kausalya2 = Bṛhadratha, .
Kausalya3 = Vasumanas, .
Kausalya4 = Kṣemadarśin, .
Kausalya, pl a people = Kosala, pl .
Kausalyā, wife of Pūru .
Kausalyā = Ambikā, .
Kausalyā = Ambālikā, .
Kausalyā, wife of Daśaratha and mother of Rāma .
Kausalyā, wife of Janaka .
Kausalyāmātṛ = Rāma Dāśarathi, .
Kausalyānandavardhana = Pāṇḍu, .
Kausalyānandivardhana = Rāma Dāśarathi, .
Kausalyātmajā, dual = Ambikā and Ambālikā, .
Kauṣika = Mahāpuruṣa .
Kaustubha, the jewel of Kṛṣṇa . Kirīṭa Kaustubhadhara.
Kautsa, a brahman .
Kavacin, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Kavaṣa, a ṛṣi .
Kāverakā, a river in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Kāverī, a river .
Kavi1, a ṛṣi . b, . b, .
Kavi2 = Śukra, .
Kavi3, a Viśvadeva .
Kavi4, a son of Kavi1. b, .
Kavi5 = Viṣṇu .
Kavi6 = Agni, .
Kaviputra = Śukra, .
Kavisuta = Śukra, .
Kāvya1, a son of Kavi1. b, . Do. = Śukra, q.v.
Kāyaśodhana, a tīrtha .
Kāyavya, name of a robber. b, .
b There was a robber Kāyavya, born of a Kṣatriya father and a Niṣāda mother. K. was a practiser of kṣatriya duties, conversant with the scriptures, free from cruelty, devoted to the brahmans, etc. Morning and evening he went deer hunting he was well conversant with all the practices of the Niṣādas, and of all animals living in the forest, etc. Alone he could vanquish many hundreds of soldiers. He worshipped his old, blind, and deaf parents in the forest every etc. One day many thousands of robbers made him their leader, promising not to slay women, brahmans, etc. By abstaining from sin they obtained great prosperity. Kāyavya, though a robber, still succeeded in winning felicity in heaven .
Keśarin1, name of a monkey, v. Kesarin.
Keśarin2, a mountain in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Keśava = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Keśavāgraja = Balarāma, .
Keśavanandana = Pradyumna, .
Keśavapūrvaja = Balarāma, .
Keśayantrī, a mātṛ. u, .
Keśihan, Keśihantṛ = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Keśin1, an Asura .
Keśin2, .
Keśinī, an Apsaras .
Keśinī, wife of Ajamīḍha .
Keśinī, the maidservant of Damayantī .
Keśinī, .
Keśinī, .
Keśiniṣūdana, Keśisūdana = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Kedāra1, a mountain in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Kedāra Kapilasya, v. Kapilasya kedāra.
Kedāra Kapiṣṭhalasya, v. Kapiṣṭhalasya kedāra.
Kedāra Mataṅgasya, v. Mataṅga.
Kekaya, pl a people, especially five brothers, princes of the Kekayas, who joined Yudhiṣṭhira . b, . the numerous passages, where B. has Kekaya instead of the reading of C. Kaikaya or Kaikeya .
Kekayādhipati = Sahasracitya, .
Kekayarājaputra, v. Kaikayarājaputra.
Kelikala = Śiva .
Keraka, pl a people .
Kerala, pl a people .
Kerala, sg. .
Kesara, a mountain in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Kesarin, name of a monkey .
Ketu1, name of a certain demon, originally the tail or body of Rāhu .
Ketu2 = Śiva .
Ketu, pl a kind of ṛṣis .
Ketuśṛṅga, an ancient king .
Ketudharman, the younger brother of the Trigarta king Sūryavarman .
Ketumāla, a varṣa .
Ketumālā, a tīrtha .
Ketumālin = Śiva .
Ketumat1, an Asura .
Ketumat2, various princes .
Kevalī, a city, .
Kha = Sūrya, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Śiva .
Khacara = Śiva .
Khacārin = Skanda, .
Khaśa or Khasa, pl a barbarous people .
Khaśīra, pl a people .
Khaḍga, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Khaḍgajihva = Śiva .
Khaḍgin = Śiva .
. Nakula questioned Bhīṣma as to which is really the foremost of weapons, and how the sword was first created and for what purpose, and who was the first instructor in the use of that weapon. Bhīṣma related that in ancient times the universe was one vast expanse of water, enveloped in darkness, etc. There Pitāmaha took his birth, he then created wind, fire, etc and then assuming a visible form he begot Marīci, etc. Dakṣa . When Sarvaloka pitāmaha had called into existence all creatures he promulgated the eternal religion laid n in the Vedas. That religion was accepted by the gods with their preceptors and priests, and by Ā R S M A Bhṛgu, Atri, Aṅgiras, Si the Kāśyapas, Vasiṣṭha, etc. all of them lived in obedience to Brahmán. But the foremost of the Dānavas, Hiraṇyakaśipu, etc and many other Daityas and Dānavas, filled with wrath and covetousness, took delight in all kinds of wicked acts, etc wielding only the rod of chastisement those foremost of Asuras forsook every kindly intercourse with other creatures. Then Brahmán with the Brahmarṣis proceeded to a delightful summit of Himavat, and after, years he arranged a sacrifice. From the sacrificial fire arose Asi, which Brahmán gave to Rudra in order to enable him to put n irreligion. Rudra with the sword destroyed and dispersed the Asuras some of them penetrated into the bowels of the earth, others got under the cover of the mountains, some went upwards, others entered the depths of the sea. Rudra then gave the sword to Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu to Marīci, Marīci to the maharṣis, the maharṣis to Vāsava, Mahendra to the lokapālas, the lokapālas to Manu the son of Sūrya. He gave it to his son Kṣupa. Thence it passed successively to Ikṣvāku, etc from Droṇa to Kṛpa, from Kṛpa to thee and thy brothers. Kṛttikāḥ is the nakṣatra of the sword, Agni its deity, Rohiṇī its gotra, Rudra its high preceptor. Its eight mysterious names are Asi, etc. . Of all weapons the sword is the foremost the Purāṇas truly declare that it was first wielded by Maheśvara . Pṛthu created the first bow. Persons skilled in weapons should always worship the sword. Blessing to the reader .
Khaga1, a serpent .
Khaga2 = Śiva .
Khagama, a brahman .
Khagarāj = Garuḍa, .
Khageśvara =, .
Khalin = Śiva .
Khalin, pl a gaṇa of Dānavas. l, .
khanaka, .
Khaṇḍakhaṇḍā, a mātṛ. u, .
Khaṇḍaparaśu = Viṣṇu, .
Khāṇḍava, name of a forest . . d, . b, . c, . e, ʹ, ʹ, . b, .
Khāṇḍavadāha, .
the of the minor parvans, in C including also Mayadarśanaparvan, in all, . At the instance of Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Bhīṣma the Pāṇḍavas at Indraprastha began to bring other kings under their sway. All the subjects lived happily. Once, in the summer, Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa sported on the banks of the Yamunā with Draupadī and Subhadrā, etc. They were then approached by a brahman, whose complexion was like molten gold . It was Agni. He asked them to help him to consume the forest of Khāṇḍava and the creatures therein for Indra always prevented him from consuming it, because he was a friend of the Nāga Takṣaka, who dwelt there with his followers and family a the antecedents of the Khāṇḍavad. b Arjuna said that he wanted a stronger bow and inexhaustible arrows, and a resplendent chariot to ride in, and that Kṛṣṇa needed a weapon with which he could slay Nāgas and Piśācas . Then Agni thought of Varuṇa, who presented Arjuna with the Gāṇḍīva bow two inexhaustible quivers a chariot yoked with horses. Then Agni gave to Kṛṣṇa a discus . Varuṇa, after this, gave to Kṛṣṇa the mace Kaumodakī . They were then ready to fight, and Agni began to consume the forest . Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa prevented the creatures from escaping. Even the gods became afraid and applied to Indra. Indra poured n showers of rain, that were at first dried up in the sky by the heat of the fire . When more rain was poured n, Arjuna dispelled it with a shower of his weapons. Takṣaka was not present, having gone to Kurukṣetra. But his son Aśvasena was there his mother, a she snake, attempted to swallow him, but had her head cut off by Arjuna Indra, raising a violent wind, for a moment deprived Arjuna of his consciousness, during which time Aśvasena effected his escape, being cursed by Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna, and Agni . Indra assailed Arjuna with clouds, which were dispersed by the Vāyavya weapon, and with a shower of stones, and with a peak from the Mandara, but in vain. Garutmat and other birds, and Nāgas, who also assailed Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, were vanquished and As G Y Rā and Nāgas were defeated by Arjuna, as were the Dai. and Dā. by Kṛṣṇa with his discus. They were also attacked by Yama with his death dealing mace, Kubera with his spiked club, Varuṇa with his noose and beautiful missile, Skanda with his long lance, the Aśvins with resplendent plants, Dhātṛ with his bow, Jaya with a thick club, Tvaṣṭṛ with a huge mountain, Sūrya with a bright śakti, Mṛtyu with a battle axe, Aryaman with a bludgeon furnished with sharp spikes, Mitra with a discus sharp as a razor, Pūṣan, Bhaga, Savitṛ, R M . and S. . With his discus Kṛṣṇa slaughtered Pś N Rā Dā As etc. The gods retired from the scene. Indra became filled with joy and applauded Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. An incorporeal voice addressed him, saying that Takṣaka was in Kurukṣetra, and that Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, being the old ṛṣis and gods Nara and Nārā yaṇa, were invincible, and that the destruction of the forest of Khāṇḍava had been ordained by fate. Then also Indra went back to heaven. The Vidyādharas, etc dwelling in that forest, all became frightened. Agni, drinking the nectar like stream of animal fat, became filled with joy. When the Asura Maya, the brother of Namuci, was about to be slain by Kṛṣṇa and burnt by Agni, Arjuna rescued him. Agni burnt the forest for fifteen days, sparing only six of its dwellers Aśvasena, Maya, and four śārṅgakas . When Agni had consumed fat, marrow, and flesh in abundance, and burnt the forest for fifteen days, he became gratified and extinguished himself. Indra, with M appeared before Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, and granted them a boon. Arjuna asked him to give him all his weapons, and Indra promised to give them when Mahādeva had been pleased with him. To Kṛṣṇa he granted that his friendship with Arjuna should be eternal. Then he ascended to heaven with the celestials. Arjuna, Vāsudeva, and the Dānava Maya, having wandered a little, sat n on the bank of a river .
Khāṇḍavaprastha = Indraprastha, q.v.
Khāṇḍavāyana, pl a family of brahmans .
Khanīnetra, a king, son of Viviṃśa and father of Suvarcas. c . King Viviṃśa had fifteen sons, all powerful archers, revering brahmans, etc. the eldest brother Kh. oppressed them all, but having conquered the entire king he could not retain it, as the people were not pleased with him they dethroned him and installed his son Suvarcas as king, and then they rejoiced, .
Khara, a Rākṣasa, son of Viśravas .
Kharajaṅghā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kharakarṇī, a mātṛ. u, .
Kharī, a mātṛ. u, .
Khaṭṭāṅga, v. Khaṭvāṅga.
Khaṭvāṅga1, an ancient king .
Khaṭvāṅga2 = Dilīpa, .
Khaṭvāṅgadhārin = Śiva, .
Khaṭvāṅgin = Śiva .
khecara said of the devadūta, .
Khyātā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kīcaka, the senāpati and brother in law of Virāṭa o nihato yathā, all. to Karṇap.sagaṇo hataḥ, Aiṣīkap.Virāṭanagare Kena bhrśārditāṃ, sc. Kṛṣṇā, Rājadh.ena padā vadhaṃ, Aśvamedhikap.ena padā vadhaḥ
Kīcaka, pl a tribe or family . Sūta, pl Sūtaputra, pl.
the of the minor parvans of Mhbhr. The Pāṇḍavas thus passed ten months in Matsyas city. As the year was about to expire, Kīcaka, the senāpati and brother in law of Virāṭa, became enamoured of Kṛṣṇā, who rebuked him and warned him of the Gandharvas, her husbands . Then he caused Sudeṣṇā to send Kṛṣṇā to him to fetch wine. Kṛṣṇā aed the Sun, who commanded a Rākṣasa to protect her invisibly . As Kīcaka seized her, she dashed him to the ground and rushed to Yudhiṣṭhira, followed by Kīcaka, who brought her n and seized her by the hair, but the Rākṣasa gave him a puṣ, so that he fell n senseless. Yudhiṣṭhira, apprehensive of discovery, commanded Bhīmasena to forbear. Kṛṣṇā rebuked Virāṭa and was praised by the courtiers, but sent back to Sudeṣṇā by Yudhiṣṭhira the Gandharvas will surely dispel thy woe. Sudeṣṇā said shall cause Kīcaka to be slain, if thou wishest it. Kṛṣṇā answered Even others will slay him . Kṛṣṇā rose up at night and proceeded to Bhīmasena, and complained of their plight and especially that of Sahadeva . Bhīmasena exhorted her to endure a little longer, reminding her of Sukanyā, Indrasenā, Sītā, Lopāmudrā, and Sāvitrī, and said To morrow evening you should manage to have a meeting with Kīcaka in the dancing hall, but so that others may not espy thee. Kīcaka came to the rendezvous and was slain by Bhīmasena, and Kṛṣṇā said to the keepers of the dancing hall Kīcaka has been slain by my Gandharva husbands . Kīcakas relatives obtained permission from Virāṭa to cremate Kṛṣṇā with him, and carried her towards the burning place. She cried Jaya, etc. . Bhīmasena hearing it, came and slew of them with a tree . Virāṭa got afraid and caused Sudeṣṇā to ask Kṛṣṇā to leave the country, but she obtained permission to remain for thirteen days .
Kilakila = Śiva .
Kiṃ = Viṣṇu .
Kiṃjapya, a tīrtha .
Kimpunā, a river .
Kimpuruṣa, pl a class of beings . c, . b, .
Kimpuruṣācārya = Druma, .
Kimpuruṣasiṃha = Druma, .
Kimpuruṣeśa = Druma, .
Kindama, a muni .
Kindāna, a tīrtha .
Kindatta, a tīrtha .
Kiṅkara1, a Rākṣasa .
Kiṅkara2, the rod of Mṛtyu or Yama .
Kiṅkara, pl a tribe of Rākṣasas .
Kiṅkiṇikāśrama, a tīrtha. k, .
Kinnara, pl a class of beings . d, . b, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . f, . b, . g, . e, .
Kinnarī, sg. and pl . e, .
Kirāta, pl a barbarous people . g, .
Kirāta, sg. = Śiva in the shape of a K when he fought with Arjuna, .
Kirātarāja .
Kirātarājan = Subāhu, .
Kirīṭabhṛt, Kirīṭamālin, Kirīṭavat = Arjuna, q.v.
Kirīṭakaustubhadhara = Kṛṣṇa, .
Kirīṭin1 = Arjuna, q.v.
Kirīṭin2 = Nara, .
Kirīṭin3 = Indra, .
Kirīṭin4 = Śiva, .
Kirīṭin5, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kirīṭitanayātmaja = Parikṣit, .
Kirmīra, a Rākṣasa .
Kirmīravadha .
Kirmīravadhaparvan . Vidura had heard it from the Pāṇḍavas and now related it to Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Departing from Hāstinapura and travelling for three days and nights the Pāṇḍavas reached the Kāmyaka wood. At midnight a man eating rākṣasa, Kirmīra, brother of Baka and friend of Hiḍimba, obstructed their path with a lighted brand, and would avenge himself on Bhīma. Kṛṣṇā was afraid. Dhaumya destroyed his illusion by rākṣasa destroying mantras. Arjuna stringed his bow Gāṇḍīva but Bhīma, making him desist, fought with trees, etc against Kirmīra, as the brothers Vāli and Sugrīva had e of yore for the sake of the same woman. At last Bhīma seized him with his arms and whirled him about and killed him. Then placing Kṛṣṇā in their front they set out for Dvaitavana. Having cleared the forest of its pest they began to live there. Passing through the forest, saw the body of the rākṣasa, and heard the story from the brahmans .
Kīrti, a goddess .
Kīrtimat1, .
Kīrtimat2, a Viśvadeva .
Kīrtivarman, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Kīrtyāvāsa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Kiṣkindhā, a city .
Kiṣkindhyā, v. Kiṣkindhā.
Kīṭa . b, etc.
Kītaka, a prince .
Kitava1 = Śakuni, .
Kitava2 = Duḥcāsana, .
Kitava3 = Ulūka, .
Kitava, pl a people .
. b . Bhīṣma said In days of old, when the emancipated brahman Vyāsa roamed over the world, he saw a worm speedily moving on a chariot road. Asked by Vyāsa, who was omniscient and knew the language of every animal, the worm said that it was running away from a large cart, lest it should be killed every creature, in whatever situation it may be placed, becomes attached to it in even this order of being am happy, think, and wish to live in his former life he was a cruel Śūdra, a usurer, etc never dedicating food to . and P etc. he now was filled with repentance and grief he had, however, worshipped his old mother, and once showed hospitality to a brahman in consequence thereof the memory had not forsaken him, and he thought he should once more regain happiness . Vyāsa said It is the consequence of a meritorious act of mine that thou art not stupefied in consequence of my penances am able to rescue a being of demerit by the simply granting him sight of my person there is no stronger power than that of penances. Thou mayst again attain to righteousness and merit the state of a worm is really fraught with great misery. The superior brahman worships the Sun and the Moon uttering mantras when thou hast attained to that state, shall impart to thee Bráhman. The worm remained and was killed by the cart. He was reborn in diverse orders of being, such as a porcupine, Iguana, boar, deer, bird, Cāṇḍāla, Śūdra, and Vaiśya. Born at last as a Kṣatriya through the grace of Vyāsa, he came and worshipped him. Vyāsa said that the sin of his former life had yet not been destroyed he should become a brahman by giving up his life on the field of battle for the sake of cows or brahmans performing many sacrifices he should attain to heaven, and after emancipation he should enjoy eternal happiness. The ascending order of transmigration is animal Śūdra Vaiśya Kṣatriya Brahman Svarga . He betook himself to severe austerities Vyāsa went to him and said that the penances of the Kṣatriyas consist in the protection of all creatures thereby he should attain to the state of a brahman. Then he protected his subjects righteously, and after death became a brahman. Vyāsa came and told him not to fear death, but only the loss of righteousness. He caused the earth to be marked with sacrificial stakes, and then obtained a residence in the region of Brahmán himself, and obtained the eternal Bráhman by his own acts, according to the words of Vyāsa. Also the Kṣatriyas, who have been slain, have attained to a meritorious end therefore, not mourn on their account .
Kośā, a river . Kośala, Kośalā, Kośalarāja, Kośalādhipa, Kośa lādhipati, Kośaleśvara, Kośalendra, v. Kos.
Kośika, pl v. Kāśika, pl.
Kohala, a ṛṣi .
Kokamukhā = Durgā, .
Kokāmukha, a tīrtha . x, .
Kokanada, pl a people .
Kokanada, various warriors of Skanda. u, .
Kokaraka, pl a people .
Kokila, name of a mouse .
Kokilaka, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kolagiri, a mountain .
Kolāhala, a mountain .
Kolisarpa, pl a people .
Kolvagireya, pl a people .
Koṅkana, pl v. Kauṅkana, pl.
Konvaśira, pl a people .
Kopavega, a muni .
Kosala, pl a people . Kausalya, pl.
Kosala = Ṛtuparṇa, .
Kosalā = Ayodhyā . i, .
Kosalādhipa1 = Kṣemadarśin, .
Kosalādhipa2 = Saudāsa, .
Kosalādhipati1, the king of the Kosalas at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira . Bṛhadbala.
Kosalādhipati2 = Ṛtuparṇa, .
Kosalaka, adj. .
Kosalarāja = Bṛhadbala, .
Kosaleśvara = Sudāsa, .
Kosalendra1 = Rāma Dāśarathi, .
Kosalendra2 = Bṛhadbala, .
Koṣā, a river .
Koṣṭhavat, a mountain. g, .
Koṭarā, a mātṛ. u, .
Koṭaraka, a serpent .
Koṭiśa, a serpent .
Koṭika = Koṭikāsya, .
Koṭikāsya, a prince, follower of Jayadratha . Koṭika.
Koṭitīrtha, name of various tīrthas .
krama, .
Krama1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Kramajit, a prince .
Krami, pl v. Kṛmi, pl.
Kratha1, an Asura .
Kratha2, a king .
Kratha3, a king . Kratha2.
Kratha4, a ṛṣi .
Kratha5, a Kuru warrior .
Kratha6, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kratha7, pl a people .
Krātha1, son of the elder Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Krātha2, various princes . b, ʹ, . Krāthādhipa, Krāthaputra.
Krātha3, a monkey .
Krātha4, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Krathana3.
Krātha5 = Śiva, .
Krātha6, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Krātha7, a serpent .
Krāthādhipa = Krātha2, .
Krathana1, a Nāga .
Krathana2, an Asura .
Krathana3, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Krathana4 = Śiva, .
Krāthaputra, a prince . Krātha2.
Kratu1, a ṛṣi, son of Brahmán . u, . b, . b, . c, . b, .
Kratu2 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Krauñca1, a mountain . u, . Krauñcaparvata.
Krauñca2, a mountain on Krauñcadvīpa .
krauñca, a kind of battle array .
Krauñcadvīpa, name of a dvīpa .
Krauñcanisūdaka, Krauñca splitter, i.e. Skanda .
Krauñcapadī, a tīrtha. s, .
Krauñcaparvata = Krauñca1, .
Krauñcāruṇa, a kind of battle array .
kravyāda, pl. = Rākṣasa, pl .
kravyāda, pl one of the three classes of Pitṛs .
Kriyā, daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Dharma .
Kriyā = Śiva .
Kriyāvastha = Śiva .
Krośanā, a mātṛ. u, .
Krodha1 . b, . b, . f, .
Krodha2, an Asura .
Krodhā, daughter of Dakṣa .
Krodhaśatru, an Asura .
Krodhahan = Viṣṇu .
Krodhahantṛ, an Asura .
Krodhahantṛ = Senābindu, .
Krodhaja = Śiva
Krodhakṛt = Viṣṇu .
Krodhana1, a ṛṣi .
Krodhana2 = Śiva, .
Krodhanā, a mātṛ. u, .
Krodhavaśa, pl a class of Rākṣasas . e, .
Krodhavaśa, a Rākṣasa .
Krodhavaśā .
Krodhavaśa gaṇa .
Krodhavardhana, an Asura .
Kroñcapadī, v. Krauñcapadī.
Kroryātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Kroṣṭṛ, a prince, one of the ancestors of Kṛṣṇa. b, .
Krūrā .
Kṛcchra = Mahāpuruṣa .
Kṛśa1, a son of a ṛṣi .
Kṛśa2, a serpent .
Kṛśa3, a ṛṣi .
Kṛśa4 = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Kṛśāśva, an ancient king .
Kṛśaka, a serpent .
Kṛśanāśa, Kṛśāṅga = Śiva .
Kṛśānu = Agni, .
Kṛkaṇeyu, son of Raudrāśva .
Kṛmi, pl a people .
Kṛmi, a river .
Kṛpa, a brahman, son of Śaradvat and brother of Kṛpī . c, .
Kṛpa2, an ancient king .
Kṛpī, sister of Kṛpa, wife of Droṇa, and mother of Aśvatthā man . Śāradvatī, Gautamī.
Kṛṣībala, a ṛṣi .
Kṛṣṇa1, son of Vasudeva and Devakī, husband of Rukmiṇī, etc and father of Pradyumna, Śāmba, etc a prince of the Dāśārhas, considered as an avatāra of Viṣṇu, the supreme god . b, . b Arjuna enumerates the feats of K. K. wandered for, years on Gandhamādana as a muni, who had his home where he happened to be when evening fell he dwelt for, years at Puṣkara, subsisting on water alone he stood for years at Badarī on one leg with arms uplifted, subsisting on air he performed a twelve years sattra on the banks of the Sarasvatī, emaciated and without upper garments he stood for divine years on one leg at the tīrtha Prabhāsa Vyāsa had told that K. was the cause of the creation, etc. he slew Naraka Bhauma and took his ear rings, and then let loose the first sacrificial horse he slew all the Daityas and Dānavas and bestowed on Indra the sovereignty of the universe he took birth among men having been Nārāyaṇa, he became Hari, Brahmán, Sūrya, Dharma, Dhātṛ, Yama, Anala, Vāyu, Vaiśravaṇa, Rudra, Kāla, the firmament, the earth, and the ten directions, etc. in the forest of Caitraratha he gratified the highest god with sacrifices and at each sacrifice he offered gold by hundreds of thousands becoming Viṣṇu, the son of Aditi, and the younger brother of Indra, he, even while a child, pervaded, in three steps, the heaven, the firmament, and the earth, and, standing in the abode of the Sun, outshone him by his splenr in thousands of incarnations he slew sinful Asuras by hundreds he cut the bonds of Muru, killed Nisunda and Naraka, and again rendered safe the road of Prāgjyotiṣa he slew Āhvṛti at Jārūthī, and also Krātha, Śiśupāla with his adherents, Jarāsandha, Śaibya, and Śatadhanvan on his chariot, roaring like clouds, he conquered his queen, the daughter of the Bhoja king by defeating in battle Rukmin he slew Indradyumna and the Yavana Kaśerumat he slew Śālva, the lord of Saubha, and destroyed Saubha at Irāvati he slew Bhoja, who was equal to Kārtavīrya in battle he slew Gopati and Tālaketu he had appropriated to himself the wealthy and holy Dvārakā, beloved by the ṛṣis and will again submerge it within the ocean at the end of the yuga he had contracted all beings and with drawn the whole universe into his own self in the beginning of the yuga Brahmán sprung from the lotus of his navel when the Dānavas Madhu and Kaiṭabha were bent upon slaying Brahmán, there sprang from his forehead Śambhu, the holder of the trident with three eyes thus these two foremost deities had sprung from his body to his work this Nārada had told the deeds he performed when a boy, assisted by Baladeva, never had been e nor would be e by others he dwelt on Kailāsa together with brahmans. K. said to Arjuna Thou art mine and am thine, those who are mine are also thine, he who hates thee hates me, and he who follows thee follows me thou art Nara and am Hari Nārāyaṇa we are the ṛṣis Nara and Nārāyaṇa born in the world in time thou art the same as and am the same as thou there is no difference between us. Draupadī said They say that in the creation of beings thou art the one Prajāpati Asita Devala called thee the creator of all worlds Jāmadagnya said that thou art Viṣṇu, the sacrifice, the sacrificer, and he to whom the sacrifice is performed the ṛṣis call thee Forgiveness and Truth Kaśyapa said that thou art sacrifice sprung from truth Nārada called thee the lord of the lords of the Sādhyas, gods and śivas, the creator and the lord of all things thou sportest with the hosts of the gods, including Brahmán, Śaṅkara, and Śakra, etc even as a child with his toys the firmament is covered by thy head and the earth by thy feet, these worlds are thy womb, thou art the eternal Puruṣa thou art the best of the ṛṣis, sanctified with Vedic lore, etc...the refuge of the rājarṣis...the supreme Lord of all creatures celestial and human, . b, will assist the Pāṇḍavas, .Viṣṇuḥ, worshipped Śiva at SuvarṇaDhaumyatirthak.āniloddhūtaḥ...Arjunodīrito meghaḥGovindaḥ, etc resided in Dvārakā, identified with the supreme god, .BalarāmaTīrthayātrāp.returned homeengaged in penances on the YamunāĀjagarap.SuparṇaketuḥMārkaṇḍeyas.came to the Pāṇḍavas in the Kāmyaka forestsya mahiṣī, i.e. Satyabhāmā, .Vārṣṇeyaḥ, identical with Nārāyaṇa, .Indradyumnop.Devakīputreṇāpi Kena Narake majja māno rājarṣir Nṛgas tasmāt kṛcchrāt punaḥ samuddhṛtaḥ svargaṃ prāpitaḥ, Draupadī Satya bhāmāsaṃv.sya mahiṣī priyā, i.e. Satyabhāmāsya mahiṣī priyā, i.e. Satya bhāmāmahiṣī, i.e. Satyabhāmā, K and Satyabhāmā returned home, .Draupadīharaṇap.Kaṃsanisūdanaṃ, prayed to by Draupadī, who praised K. with the hymn v. b foll.ŚrīK. came to Draupadīs assistance when Durvāsas, etc visited the PāṇḍavasViṣṇuViṣṇuḥŚaṅkhacakragadādharaṃKarṇaidentical with Nārāyaṇa, yam āhur vedavidvāṃso Vārāham aparājitaṃ f, .Pāṇḍavapraveśap.Satyabhāmāṃ Ksya mahiṣīṃ priyāṃGoharaṇap.Mādhavaṃall. to SubhadrāharaṇaparvanDevakīputrāt, .Sainyodyogap. Śrireturned to DvārakāPage4 b pītāmbaradharo jagatsraṣṭā JanārdanaḥDuryodhana obtained from K. the Nārāyaṇas as his allies, Arjuna that K. became his charioteerSañjayayānap.sya buddhyā yudhyeta ko naraḥ, has slain Śiśupāla, Vṛṣṇy Andhakā hy Ugrasenādayo vai Kpraṇītāḥ VāsudevaḥYānasandhip.samaḥ, sc. AbhimanyuVāsudevaḥ...Sugrīvayuktena rathenakapāṭena, v. the note of PCR p. i.e. Kaṃsai.e. Indraogharakṣaḥ, which by Nīl. is taken as a Rākṣasa named Oghai.e. KṛṣṇaViṣṇoḥ friend of the PāṇḍavasNara NārāyaṇauK. is identical with Nārāyaṇa, Arjuna with NaraYānasandhip dvitīyo vikramya tuṣṭyarthaṃ Jātavedasaḥ, sc. Arjuna all. to Khāṇḍavadahanaparvansadṛśo vīrye, sc. Abhimanyu, śreṣṭho jagataḥpradhānāḥ, sc. mahārathāḥmukhyam Andhaka Vṛṣṇīṇāṃ, among the allies of Yudhiṣṭhira Dhanañjayaudvitīyena DhanañjayenaPuṇḍarīkākṣaṃ, yataḥ Ks tato jayaḥ etymology Sañjaya explained the names of K. Vāsudeva, etc .Bhagavadyānap.K. promised to go to Hāstinapura and try to obtain peace, Yadusukhāvahaṃ Vāsavānujaṃ, worshipped by the ṛṣis K. set out for Hāstina pura, . f, . d, ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, . ee, . b, . b
Kṛṣṇa2 = Vyāsa, .
Kṛṣṇa3, a serpent .
Kṛṣṇa4 = Arjuna Pāṇḍava, .
Kṛṣṇa5, a mountain .
Kṛṣṇa6, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kṛṣṇa7, a ṛṣi .
Kṛṣṇa8 = Śiva, .
Kṛṣṇa1, dual = Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva and Arjuna Pāṇḍava .
Kṛṣṇa2, dual = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Kṛṣṇā = Draupadī, .
Kṛṣṇā = Durgā, .
Kṛṣṇā, a river .
Kṛṣṇā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kṛṣṇacchavisamā = Durgā, .
Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana = Vyāsa, q.v.
Kṛṣṇā Gaṅgā, a river. m, .
Kṛṣṇagati = Agni, .
Kṛṣṇājinottarīya = Śiva .
Kṛṣṇakeśa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kṛṣṇanetra = Śiva, .
Kṛṣṇānubhautika, a ṛṣi .
Kṛṣṇapiṅgala = Śiva .
Kṛṣṇapiṅgalā = Durgā, .
Kṛṣṇaraktekṣaṇa = Śiva .
Kṛṣṇasārathi = Arjuna, .
Kṛṣṇasya sabhāpraveśa .
Kṛṣṇātreya, a ṛṣi .
Kṛṣṇavarṇa = Śiva .
Kṛṣṇavarṇā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kṛṣṇavartman1 = Agni, q.v. Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Kṛṣṇaveṇā, a river .
Kṛṣṇaveṇī, Kṛṣṇaveṇvā, v. Kṛṣṇaveṇā.
Kṛta, a Viśvadeva .
Kṛta, name of a yuga = Kṛtayuga . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . Kṛtayuga.
Kṛta, a term of dice .
Kṛtabandhu, an ancient king .
Kṛtacetas, a brahman .
Kṛtaśauca, a tīrtha .
Kṛtaśrama, a muni .
Kṛtāgama = Viṣṇu .
. b Bhīṣma related Gautama, a brahman, belonging to the middle country, devoid of Vedic learning, entered a village desirous of obtaining charity. In that village lived a robber, possessed of great wealth, devoted to the brahmans, etc. He gave to Gautama a piece of new cloth, a wied young woman, and a house. Gautama lived happily in that village of aborigines for many years, helping the relatives of his wife, the female slave . He began to practise archery, and went into the woods and killed wild cranes, etc in abundance, and became like one of the robbers. One day a brahman, devoted to the study of the Vedas, etc and who did never accept any food if given by a Śūdra, came to the house of his ancient friend Gautama. Seeing Gautama, who resembled a cannibal, he exhorted him to aban his sinful mode of life. Gautama, repenting, agreed to leave this village next morning with his guest, who passed the night there, refraining touching anything . Next morning, when the guest had left the house, Gautama proceeded towards the sea, having met with a caravan of merchants. The caravan was assailed by an infuriated elephant, but Gautama managed to escape, and fled towards the north, not knowing whither he proceeded, wandering alone in the forest like a kimpuruṣa. At last he reached a delightful forest, resembling the very woods of Nandana, and inhabited by Y. and K aned with Śālas, etc with Bhāruṇḍas, Bhūliṅgas, etc. Under a delightful banyan tree he fell asleep when the sun had set, the king of cranes, Nāḍījaṅgha or Rājadharman, Kaśyapas son, the child of a celestial maiden, one of the daughters of Dakṣa, and possessed of great wis and a friend of Brahmán, came home from Brahmaloka. Exhausted with hunger and thirst, Gautama thought of slaying him. Nāḍījaṅgha welcomed Gautama, and asked him to stay with him till the next morning . He, who equalled Yama himself in his knowledge of duties, made for him a bed of the śāla flowers, and offered him large fishes from the Bhāgīrathī, etc. Learning that he was desirous of going to the sea in order to earn wealth, he, quoting Bṛhaspati as to the fourfold means of earning wealth, directed him in the morning to his friend, the chief of the Rākṣasas, Virūpākṣa, about yojanas away. Gautama reached the city of Meruvraja, and was welcomed by Virūpākṣa . Though not satisfied with Gautamas antecedents, Virūpākṣa, because Gautama was a brahman, and for the sake of Rāja dharman, entertained him with the, brahmans that were to be entertained in his house on the day of full moon of the Kārttika month . Some amongst them were selected to represent the . P and the deities of fire. This he did every year on the Āṣāḍhī and Māghī, and especially on the Kārttikī, after the expiry of the autumn, giving away gold, jewels, etc. on this one day there was no fear of Rā. Gautama came away with much wealth, and returned to Rājadharman, who welcomed him. Having no food to live on by the way, he thought of slaying Rājadharman . This he did having plucked off the feathers and the n, he roasted the flesh, and taking it up together with the gold he had brought, he quickly fled from the spot. The next day Virūpākṣa became anxious because he had not for two mornings and two nights seen Rājadharman, who when returning from Brahmaloka every morning never went home without paying him a visit he suspected that Gautama had slain him, and sent his son with other Rā. to inquire after him. Gautama was caught and brought to Meruvraja as the Rā. refused to eat the flesh of that great sinner, he was hacked into pieces, which were given away to the robbers. But the very robbers, though cannibals, refused to eat the flesh of that vile man . Virūpākṣa caused a funeral pyre, etc to be made for Rājadharman. At that time the goddess Surabhi, the daughter of Dakṣa, appeared in the sky above the pyre from her mouth froth mixed with milk fell upon the funeral pyre, and Rājadharman became revived. Indra came and related that once Rājadharman had absented himself from Brahmaloka and was cursed by Brahmán, who said that he should not die soon therefore he has come back to life. Asked by Rājadharman on behalf of his dear friend Gautama, Indra sprinkled amṛta over Gautama, and restored him to life. Rājadharman embraced him with great joy, dismissed him with his wealth, and returned home. At the due hour he repaired to Brahmaloka and was honoured by Brahmán. Gautama begot many sinful children upon his Śūdrā wife. According to a heavy curse denounced upon him by the gods, he afterwards had to sink into a terrible hell for many years. All this was recited to me formerly by Nārada.
Kṛtajña, Kṛtakarman, Kṛtākṛta = Viṣṇu .
Kṛtakṣaṇa, a prince .
Kṛtalakṣaṇa = Viṣṇu .
kṛtānta, .
Kṛtāntakṛt = Viṣṇu .
Kṛtāstra, a prince .
Kṛtavāc, a brahman .
Kṛtavandhu, v. Kṛtabandhu.
Kṛtavarman, a Vṛṣṇi prince, son of Hṛdika ʹ, ʹ, Nārāyaṇāvaśeṣaiḥ, sc. vṛtaḥŚalyap.among the three only remnants of Duryodhanas armySātvataḥ Traigartaiḥ parivāritaḥ, on the left side of Śalyas array deprived of his chariot by Sātyakiwas vanquished by SātyakiSātvataḥ Sātvataḥ SātvataḥHradapraveśap.among the three only remnants of Duryo dhanas armyBhojaṃ, Sātvataḥ BaladevatīrthayātrāGadāyuddhap.SātvataḥSauptikap.SātvataḥSātvataḥtook part in the nightly encounterSātvataḥ, came to the dying DuryodhanaAiṣīkap.Jalapradānikap.returned to his own countryStrīvilāpap.Anugītāp.accompanied KṛṣṇaMausalap.Sātyaki slew him, Svargāro haṇap.Hārdikyaḥ, after death he entered the gaṇa of the Marutsthe son of HṛdikaDrauṇi H Gautamāḥ, all. to SauptikaparvanKKKKKSātvataḥKBhojaḥKKK
Kṛtavega, an ancient king .
Kṛtavīrya, an ancient king bis .
Kṛtavīryaduhitṛ = Bhānu matī, the wife of Ahaṃyāti, .
Kṛtavīryātmaja = Arjuna Kārtavīrya, .
Kṛtayuga, name of the first yuga . bis, . v, . b, . c, . b, . g, . b, . Devayuga, Kṛta.
Kṛti1, an ancient king .
Kṛti2, a Viśvadeva .
Kṛti3 = Viṣṇu .
Kṛtin, a king .
Kṛtīsuta = Ruciparvan, .
Kṛttikā, pl the six wives of the seven ṛṣis, name of a constellation . u, . f, . k, . u, . b, . b, .
Kṛttikāputra = Skanda, .
Kṛttikāsuta = Skanda, .
Kṛttivāsas = Śiva, q.v.
Kṛtya = Śiva .
Kṛtyā, a river .
kṛtyā, foll foll.
Kṣama, Kṣāma = Viṣṇu .
Kṣamākṣame = Śiva .
Kṣamiṇāṃ vara = Viṣṇu .
Kṣaṇa = Sūrya, . Do pl. = Śiva .
Kṣaṇabhojin, a prince .
Kṣānta = Śiva .
Kṣapā = Sūrya, . Do pl. = Śiva .
Kṣapācara, pl. = Rākṣasa, pl . Do. sg .
kṣapaṇaka, a religious mendicant, .
Kṣara = Viṣṇu, .
Kṣatradeva, son of Śikhaṇḍin . Śaikhaṇḍi, Śikhaṇḍitanaya.
Kṣatradharman, son of Dhṛṣṭadyumna . Dhṛṣṭadyumnasuta, Kṣatravarman, Saumaki.
Kṣatrahan, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Kṣatrañjaya, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Kṣatravarman = Kṣatradharman .
Kṣatriyāḥ = Śiva .
Kṣattṛ = Vidura, q.v.
Kṣaudra, name of a caste, .
Kṣaya = Śiva, .
Kṣema, a prince .
Kṣemā, an Apsaras .
Kṣemaśarman, a Kuru warrior .
Kṣemadarśin, king of the Kosalas . Kausalya, Kosalādhipa.
Kṣemadarśīya, adj. .
Kṣemadhanvan, a Kuru warrior .
Kṣemadhūrti, one or more princes .
Kṣemaka1, a serpent .
Kṣemaka2, a prince .
Kṣemakīrti, a Kuru warrior .
Kṣemakṛt = Viṣṇu .
Kṣemamūrti, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Kṣemaṅkara, a Trigarta king, follower of Jayadratha . Traigarta, Trigartarāja.
Kṣemavāha, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kṣemavarman, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Kṣemavṛddhi, the generalissimo of Śālva .
Kṣemi, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Kṣemya = Śiva, .
Kṣetrajña, the supreme soul in the form of the individual soul, often identified with Kṛṣṇa, .
Kṣetrātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Kṣīranidhi .
Kṣīrapā = Śiva .
Kṣīravatī, a tīrtha .
Kṣīroda1 . c, . b, . d, . g, . Kṣīrodadhi.
Kṣīroda2 = Śiva .
Kṣīrodadhi . b, . c, . Kṣīroda1.
Kṣiti, .
Kṣitīśa = Viṣṇu .
Kṣitikampana, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kṣitimukha = Śiva, .
Kṣitipati = Śiva, .
Kṣobhaṇa1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Kṣubhā. b, .
Kṣubdha = Śiva .
Kṣudra1, name of a caste, .
Kṣudra2 = Śiva .
Kṣudraka, pl a people .
Kṣudralubdha = Śiva .
Kṣupa, a ṛṣi . b, . Prajānām adhipaḥ, Prajāpati.
Kṣura = Śiva .
Kṣurakarṇī, a mātṛ. u, .
Kṣuta = Śiva .
Kubalāśva, v. Kuvalāśva.
Kubera, the lord of riches, regent of the northern quarter, king of the Guhyakas, Rākṣasas, and Yakṣas, husband of Ṛddhi . c, . d, . e, . x In days of yore, Kubera, the chief of the Yakṣas, practised austerities there and obtained many boons the lordship of all treasures, the friendship of Rudra, the state of a god, the state of a Lokapāla, and a son, Nalakūbara. The Maruts installed him. He also obtained a celestial chariot, fleet as thought, yoked with haṃsas, the vimāna Puṣpaka, and the lordship of the Nairṛtas, . b, . g, . f, . g, . also the following synonyms Alakādhipa, q.v. Dhanada, . Dhanadeśvara, . Dhanādhigoptṛ, . Dhanādhipa, . Dhanādhipati, . Dhanādhyakṣa, . Dhanānām īśvaraḥ, . Dhanapati, . Dhaneśa, . Dhaneśvara, . Draviṇapati, . Gadādhara, . Guhyakādhipa, Guhyakādhipati, q.v. Kailāsanilaya, . Naravāhana, . Nidhipa, . Paulastya, Rājarāja, Rājarājan, Rākṣasā dhipati, Rākṣaseśvara, q.v. Vaiśravaṇa, . Vittagoptṛ, . Vittānāṃ patiḥ, . Vittapati, . Vitteśa, . Yakṣādhipa, Yakṣādhipati, Yakṣapati, Yakṣapravara, Yakṣarāj, Yakṣarāja, Yakṣarājan, Yakṣa Rākṣasabhartṛ, Yakṣarakṣodhipa, q.v.
Kubjāmraka, a tīrtha .
Kucīrā, a river .
Kuśabindu, pl a people .
Kuśacīrā, a river .
Kuśadhārā, a river .
Kuśadvīpa, one of the seven dvīpas . e, .
Kuśādya, pl a people .
Kuśala1, a region in Krauñcadvīpa .
Kuśala2, pl a people .
Kuśalya, pl a people .
Kuśāmba, son of Vasu Uparicara .
Kuśaplavana, a tīrtha .
Kuśastamba, a tīrtha. l, .
Kuśasthala, a village . Avisthala.
Kuśasthalī = Dvārakā . b, .
Kuśāvarta, a tīrtha. f, .
Kuśavat, a lake .
Kuśavatī, a city .
Kuśavindu, pl v. Kuśabindu, pl.
Kuśeśaya1, a mountain in Kuśadvīpa .
Kuśeśaya2 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Kuśika, an ancient king . b, . b, . c, . Kuśikarṣi.
Kuśika, pl a family, the descendants of Kuśika . c, .
Kuśikanandana = Gādhin, .
Kuśikarṣi = Kuśika, .
Kuśikavaṃśa .
Kuśikottama = Indra, .
Kūśm, v. Kuṣm.
Kuhana .
Kuhara1, a king .
Kuhara2, a serpent .
Kuhū . u, .
Kuhū = Devasenā, .
Kukkura, a muni .
Kukkura, pl a people . Kukura, pl.
Kukkuṭikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kukṣi1, a Dānava .
Kukṣi2, b, diśāṃ pālāya, son of Raibhya
Kukuna, a serpent .
Kukura1, a serpent .
Kukura2, an ancient king .
Kukura, pl a people . Kukkura, pl.
Kukurādhipa = Ugrasena, .
Kulādya, pl v. Kuśādya, pl.
Kulahārin, Kulakartṛ = Śiva .
Kulampuna, a tīrtha .
Kulampunā, a river .
Kulattha, pl a people .
Kulika, a serpent .
Kulinda, pl a people .
Kulinda = Subāhu .
Kulindādhipati .
Kulindaja = Kulindaputra2, .
Kulindaputra1 .
Kulindaputra2 .
Kulindaputra3 .
Kulindarājāvaraja = Kulindaputra2, .
Kulinatyaka, pl a people .
Kuliṅga, pl v. Kulinda, pl.
Kulūta, pl a people .
Kulūtādhipati = Kṣemadhūrti, .
Kulyā, a tīrtha. y, .
Kumāra1 = Skanda, q.v.
Kumāra2, a prince .
Kumāra3, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Kumāra4, a Pāñcāla prince .
Kumāra5 = Sanatkumāra, .
Kumāra6, pl a people .
Kumāra7, pl a class of demons .
Kumāradhārā, a tīrtha .
Kumāraka, a serpent .
Kumāraka, pl. = Kumāra7, pl .
Kumārakoṭi, a tīrtha .
Kumārapitṛ = Skanda, .
Kumārapitṛ = Śiva, .
Kumārasū = Agni, .
Kumārī, wife of the elder Bhīmasena .
Kumārī, wife of Dhanañjaya .
Kumārī, a river .
Kumārī, a river in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Kumārī = Durgā, .
Kumārī, pl name of a tīrtha .
Kumārī, pl a class of demons .
Kumārikā, pl a country .
Kumbha1, an Asura .
Kumbha2 = Viṣṇu .
Kumbhaka, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kumbhakarṇa1, a Rākṣasa, brother of Rāvaṇa . Rakṣas, Rākṣaseśvara, Rākṣa sendra.
Kumbhakarṇa2 = Śiva .
Kumbhakarṇāśrama, a tīrtha .
Kumbhakarṇa ate Bala, Caṇḍabala, Vajra bāhu, and other monkeys, then he fought with Sugrīva and Lakṣmaṇa when his arms were cut off ble the number of arms appeared at last Lakṣmaṇa killed him with the Brahmāstra. The Rākṣasas fled. Lakṣmaṇa fought with Vajravega and Pramāthin Hanūmat killed Vajravega, and Nala killed Pramāthin .
Prahasta was killed by Vibhīṣaṇa and Dhūmrākṣa by Hanūmat. The Rākṣasas fled and informed Rāvaṇa, who roused Kumbhakarṇa and sent him out with Vajravega and Pramāthin .
Kumbhāṇḍaka, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kumbharetas, a fire .
Kumbhasambhava = Droṇa, .
Kumbhavaktra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kumbhayoni1, an Apsaras .
Kumbhayoni2 = Agastya, .
Kumbhayoni3 = Droṇa, .
Kumbhikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kumbhīnasi, an Asura .
Kumbhīnasī, the wife of the Gandharva Citraratha .
Kumuda1, a serpent .
Kumuda2, a monkey .
Kumuda3, an elephant .
Kumuda4, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Kumuda5, a mountain in Kuśadvīpa .
Kumuda6, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Kumuda7, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kumuda8 = Viṣṇu .
Kumudākṣa, a serpent .
Kumudamālin, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Kumutara, a varṣa in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Kunādika, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kunda1, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Kunda2 = Viṣṇu .
Kuṇḍa1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Kuṇḍa2, a serpent .
Kuṇḍa3 = Śiva .
Kuṇḍabheda, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . next.
Kuṇḍabhedin, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Kuṇḍaśāyin, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Kuṇḍāśin, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Kuṇḍadhāra1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Kuṇḍadhāra2, name of two serpents .
Kuṇḍadhāra3, name of a cloud .
Kuṇḍadhāra4, a ṛṣi .
Kuṇḍaja, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Kuṇḍajaṭhara, a ṛṣi .
Kuṇḍaka, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Kuṇḍa1.
Kuṇḍala, a serpent .
Kuṇḍala, pl a people .
Kuṇḍalā, a river .
Kuṇḍalāharaṇa .
the fiftieth of the minor parvans of Mhbhr. Asked by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related how Indra removed Yudhiṣṭhiras fear of Karṇa, as he had promised to Yudhiṣṭhira through Lomaśa In the thirteenth year of the exile of the Pāṇḍavas, Indra resolved, in the guise of a brahman, to ask Karṇa for his ear rings and mail for the benefit of Arjuna. Sūrya then came to Karṇa in a dream and dissuaded him from giving them. There is beside some mystery which you will understand in time. Karṇa refused to break his vow always to give to brahmans and confided in the weapons which he had obtained from Rāma Jāmadagnya and Droṇa. Sūrya then prevailed upon him to beseech Indra to give him a dart . Karṇa .
Kuṇḍalī, v. Kuṇḍalā.
Kuṇḍalin1, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Kuṇḍalin2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Kuṇḍalin3 = Viṣṇu .
Kundara = Viṣṇu .
Kundārikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Kuṇḍika, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra4 .
Kuṇḍin = Śiva .
Kuṇḍina1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra4 .
Kuṇḍina2, the capital of the Vidarbhas .
Kuṇḍīviṣa, pl a people .
Kuṇḍīvṛṣa, pl. v. Kauṇḍīvṛṣa, pl.
Kuṇḍoda, a mountain .
Kuṇḍodara1, a serpent .
Kuṇḍodara2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra1 .
Kuṇḍodara3, son of Janamejaya5 .
Kuṇi = Garga, .
Kuñjala, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Kuñjara1, a serpent .
Kuñjara2, a prince .
Kuñjaraketana = Bhoja3, .
Kuntala .
Kuntala, pl a people .
Kuṇṭhaka, pl a people .
Kunti1 . Kuntibhoja.
Kunti2, a Vṛṣṇi .
Kunti, pl a people .
Kuntī, daughter of Śūra, ated by Kuntibhoja, by Sūrya mother of Karṇa, wife of Pāṇḍu, and mother of Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīmasena, and Arjuna her proper name was Pṛthā . Śūra gave his daughter Pṛthā as daughter to Kuntibhoja, the son of his paternal aunt, who was without offspring. Durvāsas, satisfied with her worshipful attentions, gave her a mantra by which she could summon whatever deity she liked and obtain children. Thus by Arka she brought forth in secrecy a child who was born with ear rings and a coat of mail. Kuntī threw him into the water, .
Kuntibhoja, name of the ative father of Kuntī, and of the brother of Kuntī . Kunti, Kuntirāja, Purujit.
Kuntibhojajā = Kuntī, .
Kuntibhojasutā = Kuntī, .
Kuntibhojasutāsuta, pl. = Kaunteya, pl .
Kuntibhojātmajāputra = Arjuna, .
Kuntikanyā = Kuntī, .
Kuntīmātṛ = Arjuna, .
Kuntīmātṛ = Bhīmasena, .
Kunti nandana1 = Arjuna, .
Kunti nandana2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kuntīputra1 = Arjuna, .
Kuntīputra2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kuntīputra3 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kuntīputra, dual, .
Kuntīputra, pl. = Kaunteya, pl .
Kuntirāja = Kuntibhoja, .
Kuntirājasutā = Kuntī, .
Kuntirājātmajā = Kuntī, .
Kuntīsuta1 = Arjuna, .
Kuntīsuta2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kuntīsuta3 = Karṇa, .
Kuntīsuta4 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kuntīsuta, dual, .
Kuntīsuta, pl. = Kaunteya, pl .
Kuntisutā = Kuntī, .
Kuntivardhana = Purujit, .
. At her svayaṃvara Pṛthā chose Pāṇḍu for her husband .
Kūpa1, a tīrtha .
Kūpa2 = Śiva .
Kupaṭa, an Asura .
Kupatha, an Asura .
Kuraṅga, name of a country e, .
Kūrcāmukha, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Kūrma, a serpent .
Kūrmarājan .
Kuru1, an ancient king, the son of Saṃvaraṇa and the ancestor of the Kurus . i, . kk, .
Kuru2 = Duryodhana, .
Kuru3 = Karṇa, .
Kuru, pl.
Kurubhūta = Śiva .
Kuruśārdūla1 = Arjuna, .
Kuruśārdūla2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kuruśārdūla3 = Bhīṣma, .
Kuruśārdūla4 = Dauḥśāsani, .
Kuruśārdūla5 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kuruśārdūla6 = Duḥśāsana, .
Kuruśārdūla7 = Janamejaya, .
Kuruśārdūla8 = Lakṣmaṇa, .
Kuruśārdūla9 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kuruśreṣṭha1 = Arjuna, .
Kuruśreṣṭha2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kuruśreṣṭha3 = Bhīṣma, .
Kuruśreṣṭha4 = Bhūriśravas, .
Kuruśreṣṭha5 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kuruśreṣṭha6 = Duryodhana, .
Kuruśreṣṭha7 = Janamejaya, .
Kuruśreṣṭha8 = Nakula, .
Kuruśreṣṭha9 = Parikṣit, .
Kuruśreṣṭha1 = Senābindu, .
Kuruśreṣṭha1 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kuruśreṣṭhatama = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kurūdvaha1 = Arjuna, .
Kurūdvaha2 = Bāhlīka, .
Kurūdvaha3 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurūdvaha4 = Bhūriśravas, .
Kurūdvaha5 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kurūdvaha6 = Duryodhana, .
Kurūdvaha7 = Janamejaya, .
Kurūdvaha8 = Karṇa, .
Kurūdvaha9 = Pāṇḍu, .
Kurūdvaha1 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kurūdvaha, pl .
Kurujāṅgala, name of a country . b, .
Kurujāṅgala, pl the inhabitants of Kurujāṅgala . Jāṅgala, pl Kuru, pl.
Kurukartṛ = Śiva .
Kurukṣetra . At the sight of K. all creatures are freed from sin, as also he who constantly says will live in K. has his sins destroyed and goes to Brahmaloka the mere dust of K. leads even a sinful man to bliss it lies to the south of the Sarasvatī and to the north of the Dṛṣadvatī there one should reside for a month on the Sarasvatī, where the gods headed by Brahmán, the ṛṣis, the Siddhas, the Cāraṇas, the Gandharvas, the Apsarases, the Yakṣas, and the Pannagas repair to the highly sacred Brahmakṣetra a visit there ensures the merit of the rājasūya and the horse sacrifice, . Naimiṣa is the foremost tīrtha with regard to merit on earth, Puṣkara with regard to merit in the firmament, K. with regard to merit in the three worlds the mere dust of K. leads even a sinful man to bliss they who reside in K which lies to the south of the Sarasvatī and to the north of the Dṛṣadvatī, really reside in heaven . He who merely expresses the wish to go to K. becomes cleansed of his sins. K. is the altar of Brahmán worshipped by the Brahmarṣis the country between Tarantuka and Arantuka and Rāmas lakes and Macakruka, that Kurukṣetra Samantapañcaka is styled the northern altar of Pitāmaha, . i, . kk, . b, . b, . b, . Brahmakṣetra, Brahmavedī, Dharmakṣetra, Samanta pañcaka.
Kurukṣetrakathana . kk The Ṛ. said to Bala Rāma This Samantapañcaka is said to be the eternal northern altar of Prajāpati there, in days of yore, the gods performed a great sacrifice. The R. ṛ. Kuru had cultivated this field for many years hence it came to be called Kurukeṣetra . Requested by Bala Rāma, the Ṛ. related In days of yore Kuru was engaged in perseveringly tilling this field requested by Indra, he said Those that will die upon this plain, shall proceed to regions of bliss after being cleansed of their sins. Śakra, ridiculing this, went back to heaven. This happened repeatedly. Indra summoned the gods, who asked him to stop Kuru by granting him a boon if men, by only dying there, were to come to heaven, without having performed sacrifices to us, our very existence would be endangered. Indra then came, and they agreed that Kuru should not toil any more but those that would die there, having abstained from food, with all their senses awake, and those that would perish there in battle, should go straight to heaven. It was sanctioned by all the principal gods, headed by Brahmán, that on earth there should be no more sacred spot than this those men that per formed austere penances here would all, after laying n their bodies, go to Brahmáns abode those who gave away their wealth here would soon have their wealth bled those who would reside constantly here would never have to behold the region of Yama those kings that would perform great sacrifices here would reside as long in heaven as earth would last. Indra had himself composed a verse here and sang it The very dust of Kurukṣetra... shall cleanse persons of wicked acts and carry them to heaven. The principal gods, brahmans, kings as Nṛga, etc having performed costly sacrifices here, have, after abaning their bodies, proceeded to heaven. The space between Tarantuka and Arantuka and the lakes of Rāma and Macakruka, this Kurukṣetra Samantapañcaka is called the northern altar of Prajāpati. All that Śakra said was approved by Brahmán, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara .
Kurukula, .
Kurukulaśreṣṭha1 = Arjuna, .
Kurukulaśreṣṭha2 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurukulaśreṣṭha3 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kurukulaśreṣṭha4 = Duryodhana, .
Kurukulaśreṣṭha5 = Janamejaya, .
Kurukulaśreṣṭha6 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kurukulādhama1 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurukulādhama2 = Duryodhana, .
Kurukulādhama3 = Parikṣit, .
Kurukulodvaha1 = Arjuna, .
Kurukulodvaha2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kurukulodvaha3 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurukulodvaha4 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kurukulodvaha5 = Janamejaya, .
Kurukulodvaha6 = Pāṇḍu, .
Kurukulodvaha7 = Vicitravīrya, .
Kurukulodvaha8 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kurumukhya1 = Arjuna, .
Kurumukhya2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kurumukhya3 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurumukhya4 = Citrāṅgada, .
Kurumukhya5 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kurumukhya6 = Durmukha, .
Kurumukhya7 = Duryodhana, .
Kurumukhya8 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kurunandana1 = Abhimanyu, .
Kurunandana2 = Arjuna, .
Kurunandana3 = Bhīmasena, .
Kurunandana4 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurunandana5 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kurunandana6 = Duryodhana, .
Kurunandana7 = Janamejaya, .
Kurunandana8 = Pāṇḍu, .
Kurunandana9 = Parikṣit, .
Kurunandana1 = Pratīpa, .
Kurunandana1 = Sahadeva, .
Kurunandana1 = Vidura, .
Kurunandana1 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kurunandana, pl. = the sons of Pāṇḍu, .
Kuru Pāṇḍavāgrya = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kuru Pāṇḍavasattama = Arjuna, .
Kurupati1 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurupati2 = Duryodhana, .
Kurupati3 = Pāṇḍu, .
Kurupati4 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kurupitāmaha = Bhīṣma, .
Kurupravīra1 = Arjuna, .
Kurupravīra2 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurupravīra3 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kurupravīra4 = Duryodhana, .
Kurupravīra5 = Janamejaya, .
Kurupravīra6 = Pāṇḍu, .
Kurupravīra7 = Purumitra, .
Kurupravīra8 = Vikarṇa, .
Kurupravīra9 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kurupravīra, pl. = Kuru, pl. .
Kurupṛtanāpati = Karṇa, .
Kurupuṅgava1 = Abhimanyu, .
Kurupuṅgava2 = Arjuna, .
Kurupuṅgava3 = Bhīmasena, .
Kurupuṅgava4 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurupuṅgava5 = Bhūriśravas, .
Kurupuṅgava6 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kurupuṅgava7 = Duryodhana, .
Kurupuṅgava8 = Somadatta, .
Kurupuṅgava9 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kurupuṅgava, pl. = Kuru, pl. .
Kurupuṅgavāgraja = Janamejaya, .
Kurupuṅgavāgrya = Sātyaki, .
Kururāja1 = Śāntanu, .
Kururāja2 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kururāja3 = Duryodhana, .
Kururāja4 = Parikṣit, .
Kururāja5 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kururājan1 = Duryodhana, .
Kururājan2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kururājaputra, dual and pl .
Kururājarṣisattama = Bhīṣma, .
Kurusattama1 = Arjuna, .
Kurusattama2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kurusattama3 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurusattama4 = Citrāṅgada, .
Kurusattama5 = Śāntanu, .
Kurusattama6 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kurusattama7 = Droṇa, .
Kurusattama8 = Duryodhana, .
Kurusattama9 = Janamejaya, .
Kurusattama1 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kurusattama, pl. = Kuru, pl. .
Kurusiṃha, pl. = Kuru, pl. .
Kurusiṃha1 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurusiṃha2 = Duryodhana, .
Kurutīrtha, name of a tīrtha .
Kurūttama1 = Arjuna, .
Kurūttama2 = Bhīṣma, .
Kurūttama3 = Duryodhana, .
Kurūttama4 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kurūttama, pl. = Kuru, pl. .
Kuruvaṃśa, .
Kuruvaṃśakara = Vyāsa, .
Kuruvaṃśaketu = Bhīṣma, .
Kuruvaṃśavivardhana = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kuruvaṃśavivardhana, pl .
Kuruvaraśreṣṭha = Bhīṣma, .
Kuruvardhana1 = Durjaya, .
Kuruvardhana2 = Duryodhana, .
Kuruvardhana3 = Parikṣit, .
Kuruvardhana4 = Vikarṇa, .
Kuruvardhana5 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kuruvarṇaka, pl a people .
Kuruvāsin = Śiva .
Kuruvinda, pl a people .
Kuruvīra1 = Arjuna, .
Kuruvīra2 = Bhīmasena, .
Kuruvīra3 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kuruvīra4 = Karṇa, .
Kuruvīra5 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kuruvīramukhya, dual = Arjuna and Karṇa, .
Kuruvṛddha1 = Bhīṣma, .
Kuruvṛddha2 = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kuruvṛddhatama, dual = Bhīṣma and Dhṛta rāṣṭra, .
Kuruvṛddhavarya = Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .
Kuruvṛṣa = Bhīmasena, .
Kuruvṛṣabha = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Kuruyoḍha = Karṇa, .
Kusasthalī, v. Kuśasthalī.
Kuṣmāṇḍa, name of a mantra, .
Kuṣmāṇḍaka, a serpent .
Kustumbaru, a Yakṣa .
Kusuma, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Kūṭamohana = Skanda, .
Kuṭara, a serpent .
Kuṭhāra, a serpent .
Kuṭīmukha, a follower of Śiva .
Kuṭṭāparanta, pl a people .
Kuvalāśva, a king of Ayodhyā, the slayer of Dhundhu . b, . Dhundhumāra, Ikṣvāku.
Kuvaleśaya = Viṣṇu .
Labdhalakṣa, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Laḍaka, pl a people .
Laghantī, a river .
laghiman .
Laghu = Śiva .
Lajjā .
Lakṣaṇā, an Apsaras .
Lakṣmaṇa1, son of Daśaratha and Sumitrā and brother of Rāma . also the following synonyms Ikṣvākunandana, . Kākutstha, . Rāghava, . Rāmānuja, . Saumitri, .
Lakṣmaṇa2, son of Duryodhana Dhārtarāṣṭra . Duryodhanasuta, Kuruśārdūla.
Lakṣmaṇāgraja = Rāma Dāśarathi, .
Lakṣmaṇamātṛ = the wife of Duryodhana, .
Lakṣmī . b, . u, . b, . b, . b, . Śrī.
Lakṣmī = Devasenā, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Lakṣmīvat = Viṣṇu .
Lakṣmyāvāsa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Lalāṭākṣa = Śiva, .
Lalita = Skanda, .
Lalitaka, v. Lalitika.
Lalitika, a tīrtha .
Lalītika, a tīrtha . the prec.
Lalittha, pl a people .
Lalittha, sg. .
Lambā, a mātṛ. u, .
Lambana = Śiva .
Lambapayodharā, a mātṛ. u, .
Lambinī, a mātṛ. u, .
Lambitoṣṭha = Śiva .
Lambodaraśarīra = Kṛṣṇa, .
Lambodaraśarīrin = Śiva .
Lampāka, pl a people .
Lāṅgaladhārin, Lāṅgaladhvaja, Lāṅgalin = Balarāma, q.v.
Lāṅgalī, a river .
Laṅghatī, v. Laghantī.
Laṅkā, the city of Rāvaṇa, formerly belonging to Kubera .
Laṅkāpraveśa . . Rāvaṇa made Laṅkā yet more strong and armed his warriors. Rāma sent the monkey Aṅgada as messenger to Rāvaṇa. Aṅgada delivered the message of Rāma Release Sītā. Rāvaṇa became furious. Aṅgada leaped up with four Rākṣasas and then let them fall then he leaped over the walls of Laṅkā and informed Rāma. Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, Vibhīṣaṇa, and Jāmbavat with monkeys and bears attacked Laṅkā and pulled n the fortifications. Then the host of the Rākṣasas set out at the command of Rāvaṇa. A great battle ensued at last Rāma withdrew his troops .
Laṅkeśavanāri = Hanūmat, .
Lapeṭikā, a tīrtha .
Lapitā, the second wife of Mandapāla .
Latā, an Apsaras .
Lāṭa, pl a people .
Latāḥ = Śiva .
Lauhitya1, name of an ocean . Lohita udadhi.
Lauhitya2, a river, the present Brahmaputra . Lohita, Lohityā.
Lauhitya3, a tīrtha . u, . Lauhitya2.
Laumaharṣaṇi = Ugraśravas, q.v.
Lavāḥ, pl. = Śiva .
Lavaṇa1, an Asura .
Lavaṇa2, a Rākṣasa. g, .
Lavaṇa3 = Śiva .
Lavaṇāśva, a ṛṣi .
lavaṇajala, cf .
lavaṇāmbhas, .
Laya = Śiva .
Lekha, pl a class of gods .
Lelihāna = Śiva, .
Likhita, an ancient ṛṣi, brother of Śaṅkha . Brahmarṣi.
Lilāḍhya, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Līlāyudha, v. Nīlāyudha.
liṅga, the Phallus of Śiva .
Liṅgādhyakṣa = Śiva .
Lobha = Śiva .
Loha, pl a people .
Lohajaṅgha, pl a people .
Lohājavaktra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Lohamekhalā, a matṛ. u, .
Lohatāriṇī, a river .
Lohita1, a serpent .
Lohita2 .
Lohita3, a river . Lauhitya, Lohityā.
Lohita udadhi . Cf .
Lohitākṣa1, name of a sūta . Sūta.
Lohitākṣa2, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Lohitākṣa3 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Lohitākṣī, a mātṛ. u, .
Lohitāṅga1 .
Lohitāṅga2 = Sūrya, .
Lohitāntargatā dṛṣṭiḥ = Śiva .
Lohitāraṇī, v. Lohatāriṇī.
Lohitāyani .
Lohityā, a river . Lohita, Lauhitya.
Loka = Śiva .
Loka, pl a class of gods .
Lokabandhu = Viṣṇu .
Lokabhāvana1 = Agni, .
Lokabhāvana2 = Brahmán, .
Lokabhāvana3 = Śiva, .
Lokabhāvana4 = Kṛṣṇa, .
lokabhāvana, adj .
Lokabhāvanabhāvajña = Kṛṣṇa, .
Lokacārin = Śiva .
Lokadhāman = Viṣṇu, .
Lokadhātṛ = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva .
Lokādhipati = Indra, .
Lokādhiṣṭhāna = Viṣṇu .
Lokādhyakṣa1 = Brahmán, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Lokādikartṛ = Brahmán, .
Lokādinidhaneśvara = Brahmán, .
Lokādya = Viṣṇu, .
Lokaguru1 = Brahmán, .
Lokaguru2 = Śiva, .
Lokaguru3 = Dakṣa, .
Lokaguru4 = Kṛṣṇa, .
lokaguru, said of Duryodhana, .
Lokahita = Viṣṇu .
Lokakārin = Brahmán, .
Lokakartṛ = Brahmán, .
Lokakartṛ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Lokakartṛ = Śiva .
Lokakṛt1 = Brahmán, .
Lokakṛt2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Lokāloka, .
Lokānāṃ kīrtivardhanaḥ = Viṣṇu .
Lokānāṃ mātaraḥ, i.e. the kine, .
Lokānāṃ patiḥ = Śiva, .
Lokaṇātha1 = Brahmán, .
Lokanātha2 = Śiva, .
Lokanātha3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Lokanātha4 = Skanda, .
lokanātha, said of princes, .
Lokanātha, dual = Nara and Nārāyaṇa, .
Lokapa, pl .
Lokapāla, pl.
Lokapāla, sg. Names of single Lokapālas Agni, . Kubera, . Varuṇa, . Yama, .
Lokapāla1 = Śiva . Do. = Skanda, .
Lokapālasabhākhyāna .
. While the Pāṇḍavas were sitting in that palace, with the great Gandharvas, there came unto them the devarṣi Nārada, having wandered over the different worlds, accompanied by the ṛṣis Pārijāta, Raivata, Sumukta, and Saumya. Nārada informed Yudhiṣṭhira about religion, pleasure, and profit, in the form of questions about his conduct. By following his advice Yudhiṣṭhira conquered the whole earth . Yudhiṣṭhira answered that he observed all those rules. Then he asked Nārada if he had ever seen a palace like his. Nārada replied that no palace among men was like his, but that he would describe unto him the palaces of Pitṛrāja, Varuṇa, Indra, the dweller on Kailāsa, and Brahmán, always worshipped by gods, Pitṛs and Sādhyas, etc. . Śakrasabhāvarṇana . Yama sabhāvarṇana . Varuṇasabhāvarṇana . Vaiśravaṇasabhāvarṇana . Brahma sabhāvarṇana . Yudhiṣṭhira said It appears that almost all the monarchs are in the sabhā of Yama the Nāgas, Daityas, rivers, and oceans in that of Varuṇa the Yakṣas, Guhyakas, Rākṣasas, Gandharvas, Apsarases, and Śiva in that of Kubera the great ṛṣis, and gods, and śāstras in that of Pitāmaha and in that of Śakra gods, Gandharvas and various ṛṣis, but only one king, the rājarṣi Hariścandra this is explained by Nārada. Pāṇḍu, beholding the good fortune of Hariścandra, had asked Nārada to tell Yudhiṣṭhira to subjugate the whole earth and then perform a rājasūya. Thereby also Pāṇḍu and his ancestors would go to the region of Indra. Brahmarakṣases, that destroy the sacrifices, always look for opportunities of obstructing it. Then Nārada went away to the city of the Dāśārhas, accompanied by the ṛṣis with whom he had come .
Lokaparāyaṇa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Lokapati = Brahmán, .
Lokapitāmaha1 = Brahmán, q.v.
Lokapitāmaha2 = Dakṣa, .
lokapitaraḥ, said of the seven ṛṣis, .
Lokapradhāna = Viṣṇu .
Lokasākṣin1 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Lokasākṣin2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Lokasambhava = Brahmán, .
Lokasāraṅga, Lokasvāmin = Viṣṇu .
Lokasraṣṭṛ = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva, .
Lokasyādhipati = Śiva, .
Lokātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Lokatrayāśraya = Viṣṇu .
Lokatrayeśa = Indra, .
Lokatrayeśvara = Śiva, .
lokayajña, a kind of sacrifice, .
Lokayoni = Kṛṣṇa, .
Lokeśa1 = Agni, .
Lokeśa2 = Brahmán, .
Lokeśa3 = Śiva, .
Lokeśvara1 = Brahmán, .
Lokeśvara2 = Śiva, .
Lokeśvara3 = Sūrya, .
Lokeśvara, pl .
Lokeśvareśvara1 = Brahmán, .
Lokeśvareśvara2 = Indra, .
Lokoddhāra, a tīrtha .
Lomaśa1, a ṛṣi . bis, . Brahmarṣi, Devarṣi.
Lomaśa2, name of a cat. b, .
Lomaharṣaṇa, a Sūta, father of Ugraśravas . Sūta.
Lomaharṣaṇaputra = Ugraśravas, q.v.
Lomapāda, king of the Aṅgas and father of Śāntā . d, . Aṅgādhipati, Aṅgapati, Aṅgarāja .
Lopāmudrā, daughter of the Vidarbha king and wife of Agastya . Vaidarbhī.
Lubdha = Śiva .
Macakruka, name of a Yakṣa and of a tīrtha belonging to him . kk, .
Maśaka, pl a people in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Mada, an Asura . n, . p, . b, . Asura, Dānava.
Madadhāra, a king . Mahīdhara.
Maḍaka, pl a people .
Madana1 = Kāma, .
Madana2 = Śiva .
Madayantī, wife of king Kalmāṣapāda . b Commanded by her husband, M the wife of Saudāsa Kalmāṣapāda obtained from the ṛṣi Vasiṣṭha the son Aśmaka, . b, .
Madgura, name of a caste, .
Mādhava1 = Balarāma, .
Mādhava2 = Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva, .
Mādhava3 = Kṛtavarman, .
Mādhava4 = Sātyaki, .
Mādhava5 = Jalasandha, .
Mādhava6, v. Māgadha .
Mādhava7, name of a month .
Mādhava8, a weapon of Indra .
Mādhava, pl a tribe = Madhu, pl .
Mādhavāgrya = Sātyaki, .
Mādhavarṣabha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Mādhavasiṃha = Sātyaki, .
Mādhavī = Subhadrā, .
Mādhavī = Anantā, the wife of Janamejaya3, .
Mādhavī = Sampriyā, the wife of Vidūratha, .
Mādhavī = Kuntī, .
Mādhavī, daughter of Yayāti . Yayātijā.
Mādhavī, a mātṛ. u, .
Mādhavīsuta = Aṣṭaka, .
Mādhavottama1 = Balarāma, .
Mādhavottama2 = Sātyaki, .
Madhu1, an ancient king .
Madhu2, an Asura, slain by Kṛṣṇa . b, . ee, . b, . b, . Asura, Asurendra, dual, Dānava, dual, Dānavendra, dual, Kaiṭabha.
Madhu3 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Madhu, pl a people = the Vṛṣṇis .
Madhucchanda, a brahman . b, .
Madhuścyutānām agrapā = Śiva .
Madhūdvaha = Sātyaki, .
Madhughātin = Kṛṣṇa, .
Madhuhan =, .
Madhu Kaiṭabhahan = Viṣṇu, .
Madhukalocana = Śiva .
Madhukumbhā, a mātṛ. u, .
Madhulikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Madhumatta, pl a people .
Madhunihan = Kṛṣṇa, .
Madhunisūdana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Madhuparka, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Madhupravīra1 = Balarāma, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Madhura, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Madhurā, v. Mathurā.
Madhurasvanā, an Apsaras .
Madhusrava, a tīrtha .
Madhusūdana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Madhuvāhinī, a river .
Madhuvana, name of a forest .
Madhuvarna, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Madhuvaṭī, a tīrtha .
Madhuvilā, a river .
Madhyadeśa, .
Madhyadeśīya, adj .
Madhyadeśya, pl. .
Madhyama = Śiva, .
Madhyamakeya, pl a people .
Madirā, one of the wives of Vasudeva .
Madirāśva1 = Madirākṣa, the brother of Virāṭa .
Madirāśva2, an ancient king . b, .
Madirākṣa, brother of Virāṭa . Madirāśva.
Madra1, pl a people. d, . Madraka, pl Mādreya, pl.
Madra2, pl. .
Madrādhipa1 = Aśvapati, .
Madrādhipa2 = Śalya, q.v.
Madrādhipati, Madraja, Madrajanādhipa, Madrajaneśvara = Śalya, q.v.
Madraka, a prince . Do. = Śalya, q.v.
Madraka, pl a people = Madra, pl .
Madrakādhama, Madrakādhipa, Madrakeśvara = Śalya, q.v.
Madranābha, pl name of a caste, . Madrāṇām adhipa, Madrāṇām īśvara, Madrāṇām ṛṣabha, Madrāṇāṃ vṛṣa bha = Śalya, q.v.
Madranṛpānuja = Śalyānuja . Madrarājānuja.
Madrapa, Madrapati, Madrarāj = Śalya, q.v.
Madrarāja1, = Dyutimat, . Do. = Śalya, q.v. Do. = Aśvapati, .
Madrarājānuja = Madranrpānuja, .
Madrarājasutā = Mādrī, .
Madrarājātmaja = Rukmaratha .
Madrarājeśvarātmaja = Śalya, q.v.
Mādravatī, wife of Parikṣit .
Mādravatī = Mādrī, .
Mādravatīputra = Sahadeva, .
Mādravatīputra, dual = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Mādravatīsuta1 = Nakula, .
Mādravatīsuta2 = Sahadeva, .
Mādravatīsuta, dual = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Madreśa = Śalya, q.v.
Madreśvara1 = the father of Mādrī, .
Madreśvara2 = Śalya, q.v.
Madreśvarasuta = Rukmaratha, .
Mādreya1 = Nakula, .
Mādreya2 = Sahadeva, .
Mādreya, dual = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Mādreya, pl a people = Madra, pl .
Mādrī, the wife of Pāṇḍu and mother of Nakula and Sahadeva . Madrarājasutā, Mādravatī.
Mādrī = Vijayā, the wife of Sahadeva, .
Mādrikā, pl. .
Mādrinandana1 = Nakula, .
Mādrinandana2 = Sahadeva, .
Mādrinandana, dual = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Mādrīnandanaka, dual = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Mādrīnandikara = Sahadeva, .
Mādrīputra1 = Nakula, .
Mādrīputra2 = Sahadeva, .
Mādrīputra3, dual = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Mādrīsuta1 = Nakula, .
Mādrīsuta2 = Sahadeva, .
Mādrīsuta, dual = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Mādrītanūja, dual = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Magadha, pl a people . e, . g, . Māgadha, pl.
Magadha, v. Māgadha9.
Magadha = the country of the Magadhas. f, .
Māgadha1 = Bṛhadratha . .
Māgadha2 = Daṇḍadhāra, .
Māgadha3 = Jalasandha, .
Māgadha4 = Jarāsandha, .
Māgadha5 = Jayasena, . next.
Māgadha6 = Jayatsena, son of Jarāsandha, . the prec. and Māgadha9.
Māgadha7 = Meghasandhi, the son of Sahadeva, .
Māgadha8 = Sahadeva, son of Jarāsandha, . next.
Māgadha9, one or more Magadha kings at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira = Jayatsena or Sahadeva .
Māgadha1 .
Māgadha1, the ancestor of the Māgadhas . f, .
Māgadha, pl a people = Magadha, pl .
Māgadha, pl name of a caste, .
Magadhādhipa = Jarāsandha, .
Magadhādhipati = Bṛhadratha, .
Magadheśvara = Meghasandhi, .
Māgadhendra = Jarāsandha, .
Māgadhī = Amṛtā, wife of Anaśvan, .
Maghā, mostly pl name of a nakṣatra .
Māgha, name of a month . p, .
Maghavan, Maghavat = Indra, q.v.
Maghavātman = Śiva, .
Māghī, the day of full moon in the month of Māgha. b, . p, . b, .
Mahābāhu1, two sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Mahābāhu2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Mahābala1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Mahābalā, name of two mātṛs. u, .
Mahābhāga = Viṣṇu .
Mahābhārata, the poem of Vyāsa . The M. had been composed by Vyāsa and was originally recited by Vaiśampāyana to Janamejaya, afterwards by Ugraśravas to ŚaunakaetymologyParvasaṅgr.m ākhyāyaĀdivaṃśāvatāraṇap.ākhyānaṃ, recited at the sacrifice of Janamejayarecited by Sauti, i.e. Ugraśravasākhyānaṃākhyānaṃetymologytribhir varṣair...Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyane... Mm ākhyānaṃ kṛtavānVyāsaVyāsa taught his disciples Vedān MpañcamānNārāyaṇīya kṛt, i.e. VyāsaSvargārohaṇap.of the M.Page4 a v. saṃhitāṃi.e. vv. b v. one verse in B specification, etymologyākhyanaṃ
Mahābhāsura = Mahāpuruṣa .
Mahābhauma, a prince .
Mahābhaya .
Mahābhīmā = Umā, .
Mahābhiṣa, a king .
. The rājarṣi Mahā bhiṣa, of the race of Ikṣvāku, had gratified Indra by, horse sacrifices and rājasūyas and attained to Svarga. One when the gods and rājarṣis were worshipping Brahmán, the Wind loosened the garments of Gaṅgā. The gods bent n their heads, but Mahābhiṣa rudely stared at her, and for this Brahmán cursed him, saying that he should be reborn on earth, . He then wished to be born as a son of Pratīpa. The Vasus had been cursed by the ṛṣi Vasiṣṭha, whom they had crossed when he was engaged in his twilight aations, that they should be born among men. They chose to be born of Gaṅgā as sons to Śāntanu, who should be borne to Pratīpa, and Gaṅgā promised that she would throw them into the water as soon as they were born, except one, upon whom they would each contribute one eighth of their energies, but who should be childless .
Mahābhoga, Mahābhūta = Viṣṇu .
mahābhūta, pl . Bhūta, pl.
Mahābhūtādhipati = Viṣṇu, .
Mahābīja = Śiva .
Mahābuddhi = Viṣṇu .
Mahācūḍā, a mātṛ. u, .
Mahāśakti, Mahāśana = Viṣṇu .
Mahāśaṅkha, name of a tree in Śaṅkhatīrtha. f, .
Mahāśiras1, a muni .
Mahāśiras2, an Asura .
Mahāśoṇa, a river . Śoṇa.
Mahāśrama, a tīrtha . g, .
Mahāśṛṅga = Viṣṇu .
Mahāśva, an ancient king .
Mahādaṃṣṭra = Śiva .
Mahādanta = Śiva .
Mahādbhuta, name of a fire .
Mahad bhūta = Viṣṇu .
Mahādeva1 = Śiva, q.v.
Mahādeva2 = Brahmán, .
Mahādeva3 = Viṣṇu, .
Mahādevapura .
v. Śiva.
. Arjuna enumerated the names of Śiva, Kapardin, etc. .
Mahādevī = Aditi, .
Mahādevī = Umā, . Devī.
Mahādhana = Viṣṇu .
Mahādhanu, Mahādhātu = Śiva .
Mahādridhṛk = Viṣṇu .
Mahadyuman, name of a tīrtha or of the sun .
Mahādyuti1 = Viṣṇu .
Mahādyuti2 = Śiva, .
Mahāgaṇapati = Śiva, .
Mahāgaṅgā, name of a tīrtha. j By fasting and bathing in M. at the conjunction of the Kṛttikās and Aṅgāraka one becomes cleansed of his sins and ascends to heaven, .
Mahāgarbha, Mahāgarbhaparāyaṇa = Śiva .
Mahāgarta = Viṣṇu .
Mahāgaurī, a river .
Mahāghora = Śiva .
Mahāgiri = Himavat, .
Mahāgīta, Mahāgrīva = Śiva .
Mahāhaṃsa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Mahāhanu1, a serpent .
Mahāhanu2, a serpent .
Mahāhanu3 = Śiva .
Mahāharṣa, Mahāhasta = Śiva .
Mahāhavis = Viṣṇu .
Mahāhrada1, one or more tīrthas . g, . v, . m, .
Mahāhrada2 = Viṣṇu .
Mahājānu, a ṛṣi .
Mahājaṭa, Mahājatru = Śiva .
Mahājavā, name of two mātṛs. u, .
Mahājaya, a serpent. u, .
Mahājihva, Mahājvāla = Śiva .
Mahākāśa, a varṣa on Śākadvīpa. b, .
Mahākāla1, name of a form of Śiva . b, .
Mahākāla2, followers of Śiva .
Mahākālī = Umā, .
Mahākalpa, Mahākambu = Śiva .
Mahākarman1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Mahākarṇa = Śiva .
Mahākarṇi, the minister of king Ambuvīca .
Mahākarṇī, a mātṛ. u, .
Mahākartṛ = Śiva .
Mahākāya = Śiva, .
Mahākāyā, a mātṛ. u, .
Mahākeśa, Mahāketu = Śiva .
Mahākośa, Mahākrama, Mahākratu = Viṣṇu .
Mahākrauñca, a mountain in Krauñcadvīpa . Krauñca.
Mahākrodha = Śiva .
Mahākṛcchra = Mahāpuruṣa .
Mahākṣa1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Mahālaya, a tīrtha .
Mahāliṅga = Śiva .
Mahāmakha = Viṣṇu .
Mahāmāla = Śiva .
Mahāmanas = Viṣṇu .
Mahāmatī, a daughter of Aṅgiras . Āṅgirasī.
Mahāmātra = Śiva .
Mahāmāya1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Mahāmāyādhara = Mahāpuruṣa .
Mahāmegha, a Kuru warrior .
Mahāmeghacayaprakhya = Śiva .
Mahāmeghanivāsin = Śiva .
Mahāmeru1 = Meru1, q.v.
Mahāmukha1, a warrior of Jayadratha .
Mahāmukha2, Mahāmuni, Mahāmūrdhan = Śiva .
Māhāmūrti1 = Śiva . Do. = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Mahānada1 = Sindhu, . Do. = Śiva .
Mahānadī, one or more rivers .
Mahānadī, a river in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Mahānadīsuta = Bhīṣma, .
Mahānāgahana, Mahānakha, Mahānana = Śiva .
Mahānandā, a tīrtha. u, .
Mahānāsa, Mahānetra, Mahāṅga = Śiva .
Mahānidhi = Viṣṇu .
Mahāniyama = Mahāpuruṣa . Cf .
Mahānṛtya, Mahāntaka, Mahāpāda = Śiva .
Mahāpadma1, an elephant .
Mahāpadma2, a city. b, .
Mahāpārśva1, an Asura .
Mahāpārśva2 = Śiva .
Mahāpāriṣadeśvara, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Mahāpatha = Śiva .
Mahāpavitra, Mahāprajāpati = Mahāpuruṣa .
Mahāprasāda = Śiva .
Mahāprasthānika . c, .
. Janamejaya said Having heard of the battle with iron clubs between the Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas, and of Kṛṣṇas ascension to heaven, what did the Pāṇḍavas Vaiśampāyana said Having heard the particulars of the great slaughter of the Vṛṣṇis, Yudhiṣṭhira set his heart on leaving the world, saying to his brothers that it is Time that ripens every creature, of which they approved. He made the king over to Yuyutsu and installed Parikṣit as king in Rāstinapura, while Vajra ruled in Indraprastha. Then he offered oblations of water to Kṛṣṇa, Rāma, and Vasudeva, etc and śrāddhas to his deceased kinsmen, and fed Vyāsa, Nārada, Mārkaṇḍeya, and Yājñavalkya, and gave jewels, etc. to brahmans in honour of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛpa was installed as the preceptor of Parikṣit. Then he summoned his subjects and informed them of his intentions they tried in vain to dissuade him. He and his brothers and Draupadī removed their ornaments and wore barks of trees then they threw their sacred fires into the water. Then they set out on their journey the five Pāṇḍavas, Draupadī, and a . Kṛpa, etc stood around Yuyutsu Ulūpī entered the waters of Gaṅgā Citrāṅgada set out for Maṇipūra the grandmothers of Parikṣit surrounded him. Yudhiṣṭhira, etc set out with their faces turned towards the east, devoting themselves to yoga, resolved to observe the religion of renunciation Yudhiṣṭhira first, then the other Pāṇḍavas in the order of their birth, behind them all Draupadī a followed them. They reached the sea of red water. Agni came, and mentioning the Khāṇḍava forest, etc he caused Arjuna to throw the Gāṇḍīva and his inexhaustible quivers into the water to be given back to Varuṇa. Then Agni disappeared. They now proceeded towards the south then, by the northern coast of the salt sea, to the south west then towards the west, where they saw Dvārakā covered by the ocean then to the north, observant of yoga, desirous of making a round of the whole earth . They crossed Himavat, and beheld a vast desert of sand, and then Meru. Kṛṣṇā dropped n asked by Bhīmasena, Yudhiṣṭhira said that this was the consequence of her partiality for Arjuna. Then Sahadeva fell n asked by Bhīmasena, Yudhiṣṭhira said it was because he never thought anybody his equal in wis. They went on. Nakula fell asked by Bhīmasena, Yudhiṣṭhira said it was because he thought that nobody equalled him in beauty, though his righteousness was without blemish. Arjuna fell n asked by Bhīmasena, Yudhiṣṭhira said that it was because Arjuna had said that he would consume all the foes in a single but did not accomplish it. Bhīmasena fell n Yudhiṣṭhira told him it was because he was a great eater, and used to boast of his strength. Yudhiṣṭhira went on with the . Indra came with a chariot, and asked Yudhiṣṭhira to ascend it for going to Heaven Yudhiṣṭhira wanted to take Draupadī and his fallen brothers with him Indra said they have already reached Heaven, where he will see them Yudhiṣṭhira would have the to accompany him as Indra said there is no place in Heaven for persons with s, as the Krodhavaśas take away all the merits of such persons, Yudhiṣṭhira refused to ascend the chariot. Then Dharma, said to Yudhiṣṭhira that he had formerly tested him in the Dvaitavana, where he had chosen the revival of Nakula, disregarding Bhīmasena and Arjuna, for ng good to his mother there is no one in Heaven that is equal to thee. Then Dharma, Indra, M A . ṛ causing Yudhiṣṭhira to ascend the chariot, proceeded to Heaven on their respective chariots. Nārada said that Yudhiṣṭhira was superior to all the R. ṛ. there. Yudhiṣṭhira wished to proceed to where his brothers were Indra, saying that his brothers had won regions of felicity, tried to persuade him to stay, beholding . ṛ. and Si. Yudhiṣṭhira wished to be united with his brothers and Draupadī .
Mahāpuṃs, a varṣa in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Mahāpura, a tīrtha. k, .
Mahāpurāṇasambhāvya, an ancient king .
Mahāpuruṣa = Viṣṇu . c, . b, . d, .
. b, . The names, alphabetically arranged, are the following Abhagnaparisaṅkhyāna, Abhagnayoga, Abhāsura, Acala, Ādideva, Agni, Agrāhya, Āhuti, Aja, Ākhaṇḍala, Amadhya, Amṛta, Amṛtākṣa, Amṛteśaya, Anādi, Ananta, Anantabhoga, Anantagati, Anantākhya, Aparājita, Aparimita, Aparinin dita, Aparinirmita, Apratarkya, Atharvaśiras, Atikṛcchra, Avaśavartin, Avijñeya, Avyaktamadhya, Avyaktanidhana, Bāndhava, Bhaktavatsala, Brahmāgrya, Brahmakāyika, Brāhmaṇapriya, Brāhmaṇa rūpa, Brāhmaṇyadeva, Brahmapurohita, Brahmeśaya, Bṛhat, Cakṣurājya, Candramas, Cāturmahārājika, Chinnasaṃśaya, Chinna tṛṣṇa, Citraśikhaṇḍin, Śrīvāsa, Dayāvāsa, Devadeveśa, Deveśaya, Dhanaprada, Diśāṃ gaja, Digbhānu, Dikpati, Divaspati, Ekāntadarśana, Gatādhvara, Guhya, Haṃsa, Harihaya, Harimedha, Hayaśiras, Hiraṇmaya, Hiraṇ yeśaya, Jagadanvaya, Jagatpati, Jagatprakṛti, Kauṣika, Kīrtyāvāsa, Kṛcchra, Kṣetrajña, Kuśeśaya, Lakṣmyāvāsa, Lokasākṣin, Mahābhāsura, Mahāhaṃsa, Mahā kṛcchra, Mahāmāyādhara, Mahāmūrti, Mahāniyama, Mahāpavitra, Mahāprajāpati, Mahāpuruṣa, Mahārājika, Māhātmyaśarīra, Mahātuṣita, Mahāvibhūti, Mahāyajña, Mahā yajñabhāgahara, Mahāyāmya, Manas, Mānasika, Manaspati, Marutpati, Māsikavratadhara, Nāmanāmika, Nirguṇa, Niṣkriya, Nivṛttabhrama, Nivṛttarūpa, Niyama, Niyamadhara, Oṃkāra, Padmeśaya, Pañcāgni, Pañcakāla kartṛpati, Pañcamahākalpa, Pañcarātrika, Pañcayajña, Paramahaṃsa, Paramayājñika, Parasvāmin, Parinirmita, Pavitra, Phenapācārya, Pracīnagarbha, Pradhāna, Prāgjyotiṣajyeṣṭha, Prajānidhanakara, Prajāpati, Prajāsargakara, Pramardana, Prathamatri sauparṇa, Pravacanagata, Pravṛttavedakriya, Pṛśnigarbhapravṛtta, Pṛthivīpati, Puro ḍāśabhāgahara, Puruhūta, Puruṣa, Puruṣot tama, Puruṣṭuta, Pūrvanivāsa, Ṛtadhāman, Sadasadvyaktāvyakta, Salilapati, Sāmaga, Samudrādhivāsa, Sanātana, Sañjñāsañjña, Sāṅkhyamūrti, Sāṅkhyayoga, Saptamahābhāga, Sārathi, Sarvacchandaka, Sarvadarśin, Sarvagati, Sarvakṛcchra, Sarvatovṛtta, Sarvāvāsa, Ṣaḍaṅganidhāna, Sukhaprada, Suprajāpati, Sūrya, Susnāta, Tapas, Tapovāsa, Triguṇa, Trināciketa, Tuṣita, Ūrjaspati, Vācaspati, Vaśavartin, Vaḍavāmukhogniḥ, Vaikhānasa, Vaikuṇṭha, Vālakhilya, Vanaspati, Varaprada, Varṇadhara, Vaṣaṭkāra, Vāsudeva, Vasu vrada, Viśvakṛt, Viśvaksena, Viśvamūrti, Viśvarūpa, Viśveśvara, Vidigbhānu, Vidyā vāsa, Vratāvāsa, Vyoman, Yaśovāsa, Yajña, Yajñabhāgahara, Yajñagarbha, Yajñahṛ daya, Yajñasambhava, Yajñastuta, Yajñayoni, Yama, Yāmya, Yugādi, Yugamadhya, Yuganidhana .
Mahārājika = Mahāpuruṣa .
Mahāratha1, an ancient king .
Mahāratha2 = Śiva .
Mahāraudra, a Rākṣasa .
Maharddhi = Viṣṇu .
Mahāretas = Śiva .
Mahārha = Viṣṇu .
Mahārṇavanipānavid, Mahāroman = Śiva .
Maharṣayaḥ sapta = Saptarṣi, pl .
Maharṣi1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Mahārūpa = Śiva .
Mahāsaras, a tīrtha. b, . Mahatsaras.
Mahāsattva = Agni, q.v.
Mahāsena1 = Skanda, q.v. Do. = Śiva .
Mahāsura, v. Asura.
Mahāsurī = Kālakā, .
Mahāsvana = Viṣṇu .
Mahat1, a prince .
Mahat2 = Hiraṇyagarbha, .
Mahat3 = Śiva, .
Mahat4 = Viṣṇu .
Mahātapas1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Mahātejas1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Mahātman = Śiva .
Māhātmyaśarīra = Mahāpuruṣa .
Mahatsaras, a tīrtha. m, . Mahāsaras.
Mahattara, a fire .
Mahātuṣita = Mahāpuruṣa .
Mahaujas1, one or more princes .
Mahaujas2 = Śiva, .
Mahaujas, pl a people .
Mahauṣadha, Mahāvakṣas = Śiva .
Mahāvāc = Samāśvāsa, .
Mahāvaktra = Śiva .
Mahāvarāha = Viṣṇu, .
Mahāvega = Śiva .
Mahāvegā, a mātṛ. u, .
Mahāvibhūti = Mahāpuruṣa .
Mahāvīra, a prince .
Mahāvīrya = Viṣṇu .
Mahāvrata = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Mahāyaśas = Śiva .
Mahāyajña1 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Mahāyajñabhāgahara = Mahāpuruṣa .
Mahāyajvan = Viṣṇu .
Mahāyāmya = Mahāpuruṣa .
mahāyogeśvara, pl .
Mahāyogin = Śiva, .
Mahāyudha = Śiva .
Maheśa = Śiva, .
Maheśvara1 = Śiva, q.v.
Maheśvara2 = Viṣṇu
Maheśvara3, a Rudra .
Māheśvara, adj .
Māheśvarapada. a tīrtha .
Māheśvarapura, a tīrtha .
Maheśvarasakha = Kubera, .
Maheśvarī = Umā, .
Māheśvarī = Umā, .
Māheśvarī dhārā a tīrtha .
Mahejya = Viṣṇu
Mahendra1 = Indra, q.v.
Mahendra2, a mountain, the abode of Rāma Jāmadagnya . g, .
Mahendra3 = Rāvaṇa, .
Mahendra4 = Viṣṇu .
Mahendrā, a river .
Māhendra, adj. . u, .
. On the fourteenth day of the moon Rāma showed himself and was worshipped by the Pāṇḍavas. Rāma praised them, and at his direction Yudhiṣṭhira spent the night on Mahendra, and then started for the south .
Mahendraloka = Indraloka, .
Mahendrāṇī = Śacī, q.v.
Mahendrasūnu = Arjuna, .
Mahendratanaya = Arjuna, .
Mahendravāṇī, a river .
Mahendrāvaraja = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Maheṣvāsa = Viṣṇu .
Mahettha, name of a country .
Māheya, pl a people .
Mahī, foll .
Mahī, a river .
Mahībhartṛ = Viṣṇu .
Mahīcārin = Śiva .
Mahīdhara1, a king Madadhāra.
Mahīdhara2, a tīrtha .
Mahīdhara3 = Viṣṇu .
Māhika, pl a people .
Mahiṣa, an Asura . u, . g, . Dānava.
Mahiṣaghna = Śiva, .
Māhiṣaka, pl a people .
Mahiṣānanā, a mātṛ. u, .
Mahiṣārdana = Skanda, .
Mahiṣāsuranāśinī = Durgā, .
Mahiṣmatī, daughter of Aṅgiras .
Māhiṣmatī, a city . b Agni had become enamoured of Nīlas daughter and would not blaze up till agitated by the breath of her lips one day when he enjoyed her love, disguised as a brahman, he was discovered by Nīla, who ordered the brahman to be punished according to the law, but as Agni flamed up in wrath, the king bestowed his daughter upon him and was granted the boon that his army should have no fear from enemies, and from that time those monarchs who attacked Nīla were consumed by Agni. The wives of M. were granted sexual liberty, and were not confined to a particular husband. From that time the monarchs avoid M. from fear of Agni, . b, . b, .
Mahitā, a river .
Mahodadhi = Śiva .
Mahodadhiśaya = Viṣṇu .
Mahodara1, a serpent .
Mahodara2, an Asura .
Mahodara3, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Mahodara4, a muni . k Formerly Rāma lived in the forest of Daṇḍaka from desire of slaying Rākṣasas. In Janasthāna he cut off the head of a Rākṣasa, which coursing at will fell upon the thigh of the brahman M. and piercing it, it stuck to it and remained there. M. in vain visited all the other tīrthas and spoke to many ṛṣis at last upon his having bathed in the tīrtha Auśanasa, the head of the Rākṣasa fell off and was lost in the waters. M with purified soul and all his sins washed away, returned to his hermitage the ṛṣis on account of this event called the tīrtha by the name of Kapālamocana. The great ṛṣi M repairing once more to that tīrtha, drank its water and was crowned with great ascetic success, .
Mahodara6 = Śiva, .
Mahodaya, a prince .
Mahopamā, a river .
Mahopaniṣad or Mahopaniṣada, .
Mahoraga, mostly pl devāsura Māḥsg. ivaAsurasura Māḥsg i.e. AśvasenaYakṣa MaiḥSiddha Māḥṛṣi MāhDaityā sura Māḥtrailokye...sa Kinnara Mesa Kinnara Māḥsarṣi Māḥsamā kulaṃsg i.e. Ananta
Mahoraga = Viṣṇu .
Mahoragapati = Śiva .
Mahoraska, Mahoṣṭha = Śiva .
Mahotsaha1, an ancient king .
Mahotsaha2 = Viṣṇu .
Mahya .
Mahyuttara, pl a people .
Maināka1, a mountain. b, . y, .
Maināka2, a mountain in Krauñcadvīpa .
Mainākaparvata .
Mainda, a monkey king .
Maireyaka, pl name of a caste, .
Maithila = Janaka, q.v.
Maithilī = Sītā, q.v.
Maitra, adj. . b
maitra, said of brahmans, .
Maitrāvaruṇi1 = Agastya, .
Maitrāvaruṇi2 = Vasiṣṭha, .
maitrāyaṇa, . Hopkins, Great Epic, p. .
Maitreya1, one or more ṛṣis . b, .
Maitreya2 = Sūrya, .
. b Bhīṣma said Once Vyāsa, while wandering in disguise, waited at Vārāṇasī upon Maitreya in the house of a loose woman, and was fed by him with excellent food. As he smiled, Maitreya said that he did not see much difference between one that behaved as an ordinary person, between one who is unemancipated and one who is emancipated, especially when was distinguished by birth . Vyāsa said that he wondered that the Vedas should contain an untruth for even a small gift produces great results, and Maitreya had, by feeding Vyāsa, conquered many high regions of felicity, as one s by great sacrifices. Gift is more auspicious than all sacred acts . Maitreya, approving of the words of Vyāsa, praised the brahmans as the root of righteousness if the brahman be gratified, . and P. also are gratified, referring to Ṛ. . Vyāsa, saying that even the most atrocious sins are washed off by penances, recommended to him the duties of householders .
. . Vyāsa said that the ṛṣi Maitreya would ad monish Duryodhana. Maitreya came, having on a tīrthayātrā arrived at Kurujāṅgala, and having visited Yudhiṣṭhira in the Kāmyaka wood. As Maitreya advised Duryodhana to make peace with the Pāṇḍavas now that Bhīma had slain Kirmīra, etc Duryodhana gave him a slight by slapping his thigh and scratching the ground with his foot. Therefore Maitreya cursed him, saying that Bhīma should smash that thigh of his with his mace this curse, however, should not take effect if he made peace with the Pāṇḍavas. Dhṛtarāṣṭra wished to hear about the death of Kirmīra, but Maitreya would not speak again to him, because his words were not regarded by Duryodhana saying that Vidura would relate it to him, he went away. Duryodhana went out perturbed.
Maitrī . b, .
Majjala, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Majjāna, v. Majjala.
Mākandī, a region in the country of the Pāñcālas .
Mākandī, a city .
Makara1 = Śiva .
Makara2, a vyūha, .
makara3, .
Makaradhvaja1 = Kāma, .
Makaradhvaja2 = Pradyumna, .
Makaraketumat = Pradyumna, .
Makarī, a river .
Māla, pl a people .
Mālā, a river .
Malada, pl a people .
Malaja, pl a people .
Mālatikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Mālava, pl a people .
Mālava1 . the two next.
Mālava2 = Indravarman, .
Mālava3 = Sudarśana, .
Mālavā, a river .
Mālavānaka, pl a people .
Mālavī, wife of the Madra king Aśvapati .
Malaya1, a mountain . d, . b, .
Malaya2, a mountain in Śākadvīpa. b, . Jalada.
Malaya3, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Malaya, pl a people .
Mālaya, v. Malaya3.
Malayadhvaja, name of a Pāṇḍya king . Pāṇḍya.
Mālin = Śiva .
Mālinī, a river .
Mālinī, one of the mothers of Śiśu .
Mālinī, a Rākṣasī .
Mālinī, a goddess .
Mālinī, .
Mālinī, a city .
Malla, pl a people . Mallarāṣṭra.
malla, pl foll .
Mallarāṣṭra . Malla, pl.
Mallava, pl a people .
Mālyapiṇḍaka, a serpent .
Mālyavat, one or more mountains . j On the summit of M. is always seen the fire called Saṃvartaka, which blazes forth at the end of the yuga for the destruction of the universe. On the summit of M. towards the east there are many small mountains M. measures, yojanas. The men there are of the complexion of gold they have fallen from the Brahmaloka and are good, and given to severe ascetic austerities and sexual abstinence in order to protect the creatures they enter the sun heated with the suns rays for, years, they then enter the lunar disc, . g, .
Mamatā, the wife of Utathya .
māṃsa, name of a caste, .
Mānada1, son of Dhṛṣṭadyumna .
Mānada2 = Viṣṇu .
Manaḥsuparṇa = Sūrya, .
Manas .
Mānasa1, name of two serpents .
Mānasa2, a sacred lake, the present Manasarovara . b, . b, sarogatāṃ nalinīṃsaraḥVasiṣṭhasaraḥ, only B C. has Vaikhānasaṃṃṃ
Mānasa3, a mountain .
Mānasa4, a name of the primeval being. b, .
mānasa, adj. . b, . b
Mānasa, pl. . b, .
Manasaḥ paramā yoniḥ = Śiva .
Mānasa tīrtha. m, . Mānasa2.
mānasa tīrtha, .
Mānasika, Manaspati = Mahāpuruṣa .
Manasvinī .
Manasyu, a prince .
Mānava, pl. .
Mānava, adj. . b, .
Mānavarjaka, pl a people .
Mānavī, v. Mālavī.
Mānavī, a river .
Mandaga, pl. . b, .
Mandagā, a river .
Mandaka, pl a people .
Mandākinī, name of more rivers . b, . m, . d Gautama said The blessed M. of king Vaiśravaṇa is accessible to those who are devoted to enjoyments pleasing to Gandharvas, Yakṣas, and Apsarases. Dhṛtarāṣṭra said Those who regard hospitality as a vow, who are observant of good vows, who give shelter to brahmans, and who feed on remnants, an the M .
Maṇḍala, name of a vyūha, .
Maṇḍalaka, a serpent .
Mandapāla, a ṛṣi . Viprarṣi.
Mandara1, a mountain . b M. is the refuge of heaven seeking munis by its grace brahmans, kṣatriyas, and vaiśyas attain to heaven there many tīrthas are seen, and there Arjuna had lived happily it resounds with notes of Apsarases and the chanting of the Vedas, . c On M. lives the Yakṣa Māṇivara and the Yakṣa king Kubera and, Gandharvas, and four times as many Kimpuruṣas and Yakṣas surround the Yakṣendra Māṇibhadra, . b M. is the dwelling place of the celestial ṛṣis, . f, . c, . d, . b, . Parvatarājan.
Mandara2, v. Mandāra.
Mandāra, son of Hiraṇyakaśipu. c M. succeeded, through the boon he had obtained from Śiva, in fighting Indra for a million of years neither the thunderbolt of Indra nor the discus of Viṣṇu could make the slightest impression in his body, .
Mandaravāsinī = Durgā, .
Mandavāhinī, a river .
Māṇḍavya, a ṛṣi . Aṇīmāṇḍavya.
Māndhātṛ, an ancient king, son of Yuvanāśva . King M. Yauvanāśva vanquished the gods, the Asuras, and men the Aśvins took him out from his fathers womb by a surgical operation, as Yuvanāśva, when a hunting, had drunk the sacrificial butter from a sacrifice and become quick with child. Then Indra let him suck milk from his fingers in twelve days he became cubits in stature. He conquered the whole earth and vanquished the kings Janamejaya, etc in a single day all the lands lying between the mountain where the sun rises and the mountain where he sets are known to this day as the inions of M. Having performed a hundred horse sacrifices and a hundred rājasūyas, he gave to the brahmans some rohita fishes of gold, yojanas in length and yojana in breadth. The gods, the Asuras, men, the Yakṣas, the Gandharvas, the Uragas, the birds, the brahmans, and the ṛṣis came to his sacrifices. At last he repaired to the regions of the righteous, . b, . b, . g, . the following synonyms Yauvanāśva, . Yauvanāśvi, .
Māndhātṛ = Śiva .
. Questioned by Yudhiṣṭhira, Lomaśa said King Yuvanāśva Saudyumni, of Ikṣvākus race, performed besides other sacrifices, horse sacrifices. As he had no sons, he made over the duties of the state to his ministers, and retired to the woods. Having once observed a fast, he entered the hermitage of Bhṛgu, while the great ṛṣis were asleep, and drank a jar of water, which the son of Bhṛgu, after having performed severe austerities, had destined to be drunk by Yuvanāśvas queen in order that she should bear him a son, who by his bravery might send even Indra to the abode of Yama. A sacrifice was then performed for him after years a son pierced Yuvanāśvas left side . Indra came, and put the boys forefinger into his mouth, saying me he shall suck . Thereby Māndhātṛ became very strong, and grew cubits, and acquired the whole of the Vedas including the Dhanurveda by his thought alone, and on the same day he obtained the bow Ājagava and a number of shafts made of horn, and an impenetrable coat of mail. He was placed on the throne by Indra himself, and conquered the three worlds in a righteous way the gems of their own accord came into his possession, and he performed a number of sacrifices with abundant gratuities, and sat at Indras side. His sacrificial grounds were to be found all over the earth, and he is said to have given away to the Brahmans, padmas of kine. After twelve years drought he caused rain to come n, paying no heed to Indra. He slew the Gāndhāra king of the lunar dynasty. Here, in the midst of Kurukṣetra, is the spot where he sacrificed to the gods .
Maṇḍika, pl a people .
Manarī, wife of Rāvaṇa .
Manarī, a mātṛ. u, .
maṇḍūka1, pl .
maṇḍūka2, pl a kind of horse, .
Maṇḍūkarāj = Āyu, .
Maṇḍūkarāja = Āyu, .
Maṅga, pl a people, .
Maṅgala = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Maṇi1, a ṛṣi .
Maṇi2, a serpent .
Maṇi3, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Maṇibhadra, a Yakṣa . c, . b, . Yakṣarāj, Yakṣendra.
Maṇibhadraka, pl a people .
Maṇibiddha, v. Maṇividdha.
Maṇijalā, a river in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Maṇika, a serpent ʹ, .
Maṇikāñcana, a varṣa in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Maṇikuṭṭikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Maṇimantha, a mountain .
Maṇimat1, a Yakṣa or Rākṣasa . Rākṣasa, Rākṣa sādhipati.
Maṇimat2, one or more kings .
Maṇimat3, a serpent .
Maṇimat4, a ṛṣi .
Maṇimat5, a tīrtha .
Maṇimat6, a mountain .
Maṇimatī, a city.
Maṇināga1, a serpent .
Maṇināga2, a tīrtha .
Maniṅgā, a river .
Maṇipūra, the capital of Citravāhana .
Maṇipūrapati = Babhruvāhana, .
Maṇipūreśvara1 = Citravāhana, .
Maṇipūreśvara2 = Babhruvāhana, .
Maṇipuṣpaka, the conch of Sahadeva .
Maṇiskandha, a serpent .
Maṇivāhana = Kuśāmba, .
Māṇivara, a Yakṣa. c, .
Maṇividdha = Śiva .
Mañjulā, a river .
Maṅkaṇaka1, v. Macakruka.
Maṅkaṇaka2, a ṛṣi. At the tīrtha Saptasārasvata the great ṛṣi M. became perfect, so that when he had cut his hand with the pointed blade of a kuśa grass, there flew from his wound vegetable juice, at which he began to dance, and the animate and inanimate creation also began to dance together with him. Then the gods, headed by Brahman and the ṛṣis, asked Mahādeva to prevent him from dancing. The god then in the presence of M. pressed his thumb with the tip of his own finger, and from the wound there came ashes, white as snow. Then M. became ashamed and aed Rudra, saying that he was the refuge of the world, including the gods and the Asuras, that he had created the three worlds, and swallows everything at the end of the yuga, that he cannot be fathomed by the gods themselves, that all the gods headed by Brahmán are to be seen in him, etc. At his request Śiva said to the Brahmarṣi that his asceticism should through the grace of Śiva increase a thousandfold, that he would dwell with him in the āśrama, and that those who bathe in Sapta sārasvata and worship Śiva should be able to obtain everything here and hereafter, and go to the Sārasvata loka then Mahādeva disappeared, . j M. had from his youth led the life of a brahma cārin. Once, when performing his ablutions in the river Sarasvatī, he beheld a woman bathing in the river at this sight his seed dropped and fell into the Sarasvatī he took it up and placed it in his earthen pot then it became divided into seven parts, whence were born seven ṛṣis Vāyuvega, etc who were the progenitors of the Maruts. M. was the son of Mātariśvan and Sukanyā, . Brahmarṣi.
Maṅki, name of a man .
Manmatha = Kāma, q.v.
Manmathakara, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Manobhava = Kāma, q.v.
Manogati = Agni, .
Manohara = Viṣṇu .
Manoharā .
Manojava1, son of the Vasu Anila and Śivā .
Manojava2, a tīrtha .
Manojava3 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Manojavā, a mātṛ. u, .
Manonuga, a region in Krauñcadvīpa .
Manoramā, an Apsaras .
Manoramā, a river, one of the seven Sarasvatīs. i, .
Manovega = Śiva .
Manovirudh, pl a class of gods .
Manthāna = Śiva .
Mantharā, the maid of Kaikeyī .
Manthinī, a mātr. u, .
Mantra1 .
Mantra2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Mantrakāra = Śiva .
Mantramūrti = Śiva, .
Mantraparvan .
Mantrastuta = Skanda
Mantravid = Śiva .
Manu1, father of the human race, one or more Prajāpatis bis . c, . b, . f, . u, . b, . b, married ten daughters of DakṣaŚanaiścaraḥ Sūryaputro bhaviṣyati Muḥ ādigaṇapūrvakaḥ, sc. VyāsaĀnuśāsanik.Śiva identified with M.oḥ...gatiṃ, i.e. ŚivaŚiva identified with M.taṃ dharmaṃ Mr abravīt, quotationr evaṃ praśaṃsati, quotationstriyaḥ puṃsāṃ paridade Mr jigamiṣur divaṃunābhihitaṃ śāstraṃoḥ śrutvānuśāsanaṃ, quotationr abravīt, quota tionity abravīd Mḥ, quotationdharmaṃ taṃ Mḥ prāha dharmavit, quotationr abravīt, quotationKṛṣṇa Vāsudevaor vaṃśe, father of AṅgaĀnuśāsanik.Prajāpatiḥ
Manu2, Cākṣuṣa .
Manu3, Prācetasa .
Manu4, Sāvarṇa .
Manu5, Svārociṣa. b, Svārociṣaṃ, learnt the religion of Nārāyaṇa from Brahmán, and imparted the knowledge of it to his son Śaṅkhapada
Manu6, Svāyambhuva . c, . b, . Svāyambhuva.
Manu7, Vaivasvata . Kaśyapa, the son of Marīci, begat upon the daughter of Dakṣa the Ādityas and Vivasvat . Vivasvat begat Manu and Yama Vaivasvata. Manu begat sixty sons the names of ten were the following Vena, Dhṛṣṇu, Nariṣyat, Nābhāga, Ikṣvāku, Kāruṣa, Śaryāti, Ilā, Pṛṣadhra, Nābhāgāriṣṭa the rest perished quarrelling with each other, . f When the Lokapālas gave the sword to M. the son of Sūrya, they said Thou art the Lord of all men protect all creatures with this sword containing religion within its womb ...they should be punished essentially with wordy rebukes, and with fines and forfeitures loss of limbs or death should only be inflicted for grave reasons . M. gave the sword to his son Kṣupa for the protection of the creatures, . b, learnt the religion of Nārāyaṇa from Vivasvat, and imparted the knowledge of it to IkṣvākuSudarśanop.Prajāpateḥ, father of IkṣvākuĀnuśāsanik.Vaivasvatāya, learnt the, names of Śiva from Gautama, and taught them to NārāyaṇaVītahavyop.father of ŚaryātiĀnuśāsanik.father of SudyumnaKṛṣṇa Vāsudevafather of Ilā = SudyumnaSaṃvartta Maruttīyadaṇḍadharaḥ, father of Prasandhi and grandfather of Kṣupa, whose son was Ikṣvāku
Manu8 = Viṣṇu .
Manu9, name of a fire .
Manu1, a daughter of Prādhā and Kaśyapa .
manu, .
Manu, pl. . b, . g, .
Manuputra, pl. . b, .
Mānuṣa, a tīrtha .
. . The six divorced wives of the ṛṣis, together with Vinatā, obtained permission from Skanda to become his mothers. At the request of Indra the Kṛttikās are placed among the nakṣatras instead of Abhijit, the younger sister of Rohiṇī, who from jealousy had repaired to the woods. Brahmán ordered that time should be reckoned from Dhaniṣṭhā, while it had formerly been reckoned from Rohiṇī . Then mothers asked Skanda that they might become the mothers of the worlds instead of the old mothers and devour the progeny of those old mothers, because they had slandered them before their husbands, and always dwell with Skanda. Skanda granted that until the age of years they should have the power of afflicting the human kind, and he loosed from his body his Raudra nature, under the name of Skandāpasmāra, that they might dwell with him. Enumeration of several grahas, among others the male and female children of Skanda they are all named Skandagrahas they are propitiated with offerings, ablutions, unguents, etc and particularly by the worship of Skanda and when they are propitiated they bestow good on men. Then are mentioned the grahas, that afflict men from the to the year after the year fever takes the place of the grahas. These evil spirits always avoid those who have subdued their senses, etc and those who are devoted to Maheśvara .
manvantara, .
Mānya1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Manyantī, a fire .
Manyu, name of a fire .
Manyumat, a fire.
Mārdamarṣi, v. Mārgamarṣi.
Mārga1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Mārgaśīrṣa, name of a month .
Mārgaśīrṣī, the day of full moon in the month of MārgaśīrṣaTīrthayātrāp.yām atītāyāṃ Puṣyeṇa prayayuḥ, sc. the Pāṇḍavas on their tīrthayātrāRājadh.Caitryāṃ vā Myāṃ vā senāyogaḥ praśasyate
Mārgamarṣi, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Mārgaṇapriyā, one of the daughters of Pradhā .
Mārīca1, a Rākṣasa, friend of Rāvaṇa . b From fear of Rāma M. ated an ascetic mode of life, . Rakṣa
Mārīca2 = Kaśyapa, .
Marīci1, a ṛṣi, son of Brahmán and father of Kaśyapa . c, . c, . u, . b, . c, . b, . g, . b, .
Marīci2, an Apsaras .
Marīci3 = Viṣṇu .
Marīcin = Sūrya, .
Marīcipa, pl a kind of ṛṣis . b, . u, . e, .
Māriṣa, pl a people .
Māriṣā, a river .
Mārjalīya = Śiva, .
Mārjāra mūṣika saṃvāda . b There was a large banyan in the midst of a forest, with various kinds of birds, etc. A wise mouse, Palita, lived at the foot of that tree, having made a hole there with outlets. On the branches lived a cat Lomaśa. A Cāṇḍāla came and built a hut, setting his traps of leather strings every evening after sunset. One day he caught the cat. Palita began to eat the flesh in the trap, but beheld the mongoose Harito and the owl Candraka. He resolved upon saving the cat though an enemy, in order to escape from them having made peace with the cat, he crouched beneath it the mongoose and owl left the spot the mouse began to cut the strings slowly, notwithstanding the cats impatience. At morning the Cāṇḍāla Parigha appeared, accompanied by a pack of s. Then the mouse quickly cut the remaining string the cat got upon the banyan, Palita entered his hole. The hunter took up his net and left the spot. Palita would not conclude friendship with the cat, and entered another hole.
Mārkaṇḍeya, a Brahmarṣi . b, . Bhārgava, Bhārgavasattama, Bhṛgukulaśreṣṭha, Bhṛgu nandana, Brahmarṣi, Viprarṣi.
Mārkaṇḍeyasamāsyā .
. When the Pāṇḍavas were dwelling at that very place, there set in the season of the rains . Then in the autumn they spent the holiest night, that of the full moon in the month of Kārttika, on the Sarasvatī with the ascetics. As soon as the dark fortnight set in, they with their charioteers and cooks entered the Kāmyaka forest . In the Kāmyaka wood many brahmans came to them, and one of them said that Kṛṣṇa and Mārkaṇḍeya would come to see them. Immediately Kṛṣṇa arrived with Satyabhāmā on his chariot that was yoked with Śaibya and Sugrīva. He told Kṛṣṇā that her sons, though her father and brothers proffered them a king and territories, found no joy in the house of Drupada, but that in the town of the Vṛṣṇis they were directed by Subhadrā and received instruction from Raukmiṇeya even as Aniruddha, Abhimanyu, Sunītha, and Bhānu, and were instructed by the young Abhimanyu in the use of arms. Then he suggested to Yudhiṣṭhira with the Daśārhas, Kukuras, and Andhakas, to kill Duryodhana, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira said they would stand by their promise, and after the thirteen years take refuge in Kṛṣṇa. While they were thus talking, the brahmarṣi Mārkaṇḍeya appeared. When they had taken their seats, the devarṣi Nārada also came to visit them. Yudhiṣṭhira, mentioning the happiness of the impious Dhārtarāṣṭras, asked Mārkaṇḍeya about the results of mens acts. Mārkaṇ ḍeya, after having described the Kṛta age and the subsequent deterioration, answered the question . Brāhmaṇamāhātmya kathana . Sarasvatī Tārkṣya saṃvāda . Vaivasvatopākhyāna . Yudhiṣṭhira, saying that Mārkaṇḍeya alone worships Brahmán at the time of the great dissolution, when he sleeps in a lotus flower, and when he awakes to recreate the world, asked him to explain the causes of things. Mārkaṇḍeya said Janārdana attired in yellow robes is the great creator of everything. After the dissolution, creation again comes to life. Kṛta yuga =, years dawn years eve years Tretā yuga =, Dvāpara yuga =, Kali yuga =, altogether a cycle of yugas =, years. After the Kali yuga is over, the Kṛta yuga comes again. One thousand cycles constitute a day of Brahmán. Description of Kali yuga . Then comes a long drought, and seven suns drink up all water and reduce wood and grass to ashes. Then the Samvartaka fire with wind penetrates into Rasātala and terrifies the gods, Dānavas, and Yakṣas, and consumes this world with gods, Asuras, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Uragas, and Rākṣasas. And there rise in the sky deep masses of clouds flooding the entire surface of the earth and showering incessantly for twelve years. Then Svayambhū, dwelling in the lotus, drinks this terrible wind and goes to sleep. When all has become water, alone wander in affliction and become fatigued, and find no resting place. Then behold a vast banyan tree, and on a couch attached to a bough of that tree a fair boy with yellow robes, with the mark of Śrīvatsa. He caused me to enter his body through the mouth, and then beheld the whole earth with cities and kings, Gaṅgā, Śatadru, etc gods, Sādhyas, Rudras, Ādityas, etc At last was suddenly projected through his open mouth by a gust of wind. Within that very moment acquired a new sight and beheld myself emancipated . wished to know his self. Then he spoke to me The gods even not know me truly. am Nārāyaṇa, the eternal and unchangeable source of all things, the Creator and Destroyer of all am Viṣṇu, Brahmán, Śakra, etc. in the form of Śeṣa support this earth, in the form of a boar raised it when sunk in water am the Vaḍavāvaktra fire from my mouth, arms, thighs, and feet sprang brahmans, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, and śūdras from me spring the Ṛg Sāma, Yajur, and Atharva veda am the Samvartaka fire, the Samvartaka wind, the Samvartaka sun, and the Samvartaka fire the stars are the pores of my skin, etc. When virtue and morality decrease, create myself into new forms in the Kṛta age become white, etc. . When the end comes, alone in the form of Kāla destroy the three worlds, etc. The grandsire of all creatures is half of my body. am the bearer of the conch shell, the discus, and the mace. For a period of, cycles of yugas sleep, overwhelming all creatures in insensibility, and stay here, in the form of a boy though am old, until Brahmán wakes up under the form of Brahmán have repeatedly granted thee boons When Brahmán awakes, will then alone create all creatures. Then he disappeared, and beheld this creation start into life. And that deity is Kṛṣṇa, thy relative. In consequence of the boon granted by him memory s not fail me, my life is long, and death is under my control . Then all bowed n unto Jaṇārdana, who comforted them . Yudhiṣṭhira asked him about the future cause of the government of the earth. Mārkaṇḍeya, having given a short description of the other yugas, described in detail the Kali yuga in the new Kṛta yuga, Kalkin will arise. Then Mārkaṇḍeya gave Yudhiṣṭhira some moral precepts and exhortations . Vāmadevacarita . Baka Śakra saṃvāda . Śibi . Nāhuṣa carita on the same topic There were two learned and able kings, Vṛṣadarbha and Seduka. Seduka knew that Vṛṣa darbha had from his boyhood an unuttered vow, that he would give no other metal to brahmans than gold and silver. He once sent a brahman, who asked him for, horses for his preceptor, to Vṛṣadarbha, who whipped him and then gave him a days tribute, because he had whipped him . Śibi . Rājanyamahābhāgya . Indradyumnopākhyāna . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira in what condition a man should practise charity, Mārkaṇḍeya enumerated four kinds of futile life and sixteen kinds of futile charity. The brahmans save others and themselves by japa, mantra, and homa. He next enume rated the brahmans that should be excluded from śrāddhas, and gave other moral precepts then he enumerated the persons to whom one should make gifts the effects of various gifts to brahmans . Yamaloka . Precepts about gifts, washing the feet of brahmans, etc. Blessing upon the reader. Three kinds of purity by aing sandhyā and reciting Gāyatrī one is protected against sin and evil results from gifts, against inauspicious stars, and against Rākṣasas. Greatness of the brahmans. The carrying of three staves, etc are useless if the heart be not pure. They who not commit sin in manas, word, deed, and buddhi really practise austerities . On the effects of various gifts at various times . Having heard the history of Indradyumna, Yudhiṣṭhira, saying that Mārkaṇḍeya knew the gods, Dānavas, Rākṣasas, the royal genealogies and the genealogies of the ṛṣis, and Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Kinnaras, and Apsarases, asked him about Kuva lāśva Ikṣvāku. Mārkaṇḍeya related Dhundhumāropākhyāna . Pativratopākhyāna . Aṅgirasa . Skanpatti . Skanda Śakra samāgama . Skanākhyāna . Manuṣyagrahakathana . Skandayuddha . Kārttikeyastava .
Mārtaṇḍa = Vivasvat, q.v.
Mārttikāvata1, a country .
Mārttikāvata2, pl a people .
Mārttikāvata3, adj .
Mārttikāvataka, adj .
Mārttikāvatika, adj .
Maru, v. Muru.
Marubhūmi, a country .
Marudgaṇa, name of a tīrtha. q By bathing in the tīrtha M in the retreat of the Pitṛs, and in the tīrtha of Vaivasvata one becomes cleansed. By bathing in the tīrtha Brahmasaras on the Bhāgīrāthī one attains to the region of Soma, .
Mārudha, a country .
Marukaccha, v. Bharukaccha.
Marut = Vāyu, q.v .
Marut, pl a class of gods, followers of Indra . bis, . b, . c, . d, . j, . u, . x, . ee, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . b, . b, . f, . g
Maruta, a prince .
Māruta = Vāyu, q.v.
Māruta, adj. .
Māruta1, pl. . b, . Marut, pl.
Māruta2, pl the warriors of the gods .
Māruta3, pl a people .
Mārutāśana, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Mārutantavya, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Mārutātmaja1 = Bhīmasena, q.v.
Mārutātmaja2 = Hanūmat, q.v.
Māruti = Bhīmasena, q.v. .
Marutpati1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Śiva .
Marutsuta = Bhīmasena, .
Marutta, an ancient king, son of Avikṣit bis M the son of Avikṣit, in order to compete with Bṛhaspati, caused Saṃvarta to officiate at his sacrifice. Śiva had given him wealth. The sacrifice took place on the golden base of Himavat the gods with Indra and Bṛhaspati used to come to him the Maruts used to become distributors of food in his palace the Viśvedevas were his courtiers the gods yielded copious showers of rain he gratified the ṛṣis, the Pitṛs, and the gods, he reigned for, years, and then repaired to the eternal regions of bliss acquired by his merits, . b, . b, . b, . Āvikṣita, Maruta.
Marutvat = Indra, q.v.
Marutvat, pl a class of gods . Marut, pl.
Maryādā, a Vidarbha princess .
Maryādā, a Videha princess .
Māsa1 = Skanda, . Do. = Śiva .
māsa, pl .
Māsārdha = Śiva .
Māsikavratadhara = Mahāpuruṣa .
Masīra, pl a people .
Mātali, the charioteer of Indra . the following synonyms Śakrasārathi, . Devasārathi, .
Mātalīya, adj. .
. . The holy Ṛṣi Kaṇva said to Duryodhana in the assembly of the Kurus Brahmán, the grandsire of the universe, is indestructible and eternal. The holy Ṛṣis Nara and Nārāyaṇa are of the same character. Of all the sons of Aditi, Viṣṇu alone is eternal...In this connection is cited an old story Mātali, the charioteer of Indra, had, by his wife Sudharmā, one beautiful daughter, Guṇakeśī. As he found no suitable husband for her amongst Dai G or men and Ṛ Mātali set out for the Nāgaloka . On the way Nārada, proceeding to visit Varuṇa, followed Mātali, and first showed him the abode of Varuṇa, surrounded by his sons and grandsons. Varuṇas son Puṣkara had been chosen as husband by Somas daughter Jyotsnākālī . He then showed him the abode, entirely made of gold, of the liquor to the possession of that liquor the gods owe their being Surāḥ. He showed him also the weapons that had belonged to the Daityas and had been obtained by the gods as a booty of war when hurled at the foe they always return into the hand that hurls them. Here dwelt in days of yore many tribes of Rā. and Dai. Here is that fire of blazing flames and the discus of Viṣṇu and that knotty bow that was created for the destruction of the world it is always protected with great vigilance by the gods, and it is from this bow that the one wielded by Arjuna has taken its name it is endued with the strength of, bows it punishes all wicked kings it was first created by Brahmán and praised by Śukra it is held by the sons of the Lord of waters. He showed him also Varuṇas umbrella in the umbrella house, always dropping water that cannot be seen. Innumerable are the wonders to be seen here . In the very centre of the Nāgaloka is the city Pātāla with Daityas and Dānavas, the Asura fire, fed by water here the gods, having first vanquished their foes, quaffed the amṛta and deposited the residue the Āditya Hayaśiras from here Airāvata takes up water in order to impart it to the clouds, and it is that water which Indra pours n as rain aquatic animals, the timi, etc which subsist on the rays of the moon here Mahādeva practised ascetic austerities for the benefit of all creatures maharṣis addicted to the vow of go here in the race of the celebrated elephant Supratīka were born the elephants Airāvaṇa, Vāmana, Kumuda, and Añjana an egg in the waters from the commencement of the creation, whence, when the end of the world comes, a fire bursts forth and consumes the three worlds, etc. Mātali said No one here seems to be eligible . In Pātāla is Hiraṇyapura, built by the Dānava Maya, belonging to the Daityas and Dānavas, who in days of yore lived here having obtained boons, exhibiting, different kinds of illusion, incapable of being vanquished by Śakra, Yama, Varuṇa, or Kubera, etc. The Kālakhañjas and the Yātudhānas the Nivātakavacas many times, O Mātali thou with thy son Gomukha and Indra hadst to retreat before them description of their abodes . Mātali would not choose a son in law among the Dānavas, the enemies of the gods as regards thyself, know that thy heart is ever set on fomenting quarrels . Then the world of the Suparṇas, who subsist on snakes and have sprung from the six sons of Garuḍa Sumukha, etc of Kaśyapas and Vinatās race, aned with the Śrīvatsa, belonging to the kṣatriya order, for they never attain to brahmanhood in consequence of their preying upon their kinsmen they are shown favour by Viṣṇu, and ae Viṣṇu. The names of the principal are Suvarṇacūḍa, etc. . Rasātala is the seventh stratum below the earth here dwells Surabhī, the mother of kine, born of the amṛta her milk springs from the essence of the six different kinds of tastes she sprang of old from the mouth of Brahmán, who was gratified with drinking the amṛta and vomited the best of things . A jet of her milk created the Milky Ocean, covered with white foam that is the food of the ascetics Phenapāḥ the very gods fear them because of their austerities. From Surabhī are born the four kine that support the quarters in the East Surūpā, in the South Haṃsikā, in the West Subhadrā, in the North Sarvakāmadughā. The gods and the Asuras, making Mandara their pole, churned the Ocean, and obtained Vāruṇī, Lakṣmī, amṛta, Uccaiḥśravas, and Kaustubha. Surabhī milks sudhā to those who live on sudhā, svadhā to those who live on svadhā, and amṛta to those who live on amṛta . The gāthā that was sung by the dwellers of Rasātala in days of old is still heard to be recited in the world by persons of learning Neither in the Nāga loka, nor in Svarga, nor in a vimāna, nor in heaven is residence so happy as in Rasātala . The city of Bhogavatī resembles Indras city Amarāvatī it is ruled over by Vāsuki, the king of the Nāgas here dwells Śeṣa here dwell the innumerable Nāgas, the sons of Surasā, wearing svastika, etc. The principal are Vāsuki, etc. . Mātali wished to get for his son in law the Nāga Sumukha of Airāvatas race, the son of Cikura, and the grandson of Āryaka Kauravya and the daughters son of Vāmana . Nārada introduced Mātali to Āryaka as the friend and charioteer of Indra, who drives his chariot drawn by, steeds, and thereby has vanquished the enemies of the gods. Āryaka objected that Garuḍa, who had slain Cikura, when he left these regions had said that after a month he would devour Sumukha also. According to a proposal of Mātali, they all visited Indra and Viṣṇu Viṣṇu proposed to give amṛta to Sumukha but Indra disagreed on account of the prowess of Garuḍa instead he gave him an excellent lease of life, and having married Mātalis daughter he returned home . Garuḍa made remonstrances to Indra, saying that he, like him, can without any fatigue bear the weight of the three worlds that he had slain the Daityas Śrutaśrī, etc. that he not only perches on Viṣṇus flagstaff, but sometimes carries him with all his friends on his back, and he can carry Viṣṇu without fatigue on only one of his feathers. Viṣṇu shows him that he cannot bear the weight of his one right arm then he threw Sumukha with the toe of his foot upon Garuḍas breast. And from that time Garuḍa has ever lived with that snake. Kaṇva continued In the same way, O Duryodhana thou canst not encounter Bhīma, etc. . Duryodhana, fixing his eyes on Karṇa, burst into laughter, saying am precisely what the creator has made me .
Mataṅga1, an ancient king . the story of Satyavrata in Harivaṃśa .
Mataṅga2, one or more ṛṣis .
Mātaṅga, a ṛṣi .
mātaṅga, pl. .
mātaṅga, name of a caste, ff. .
Mataṅgavāpī, a tīrtha .
Mātaṅgī, daughter of Krodhavaśā, mother of the elephants .
Mātariśvan1 = Vāyu, q.v.
Mātariśvan2, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Māṭhara, a follower of Sūrya . b, .
Māṭhara, pl v. Rāmaṭha, pl.
Mathurā, a city, the present Muthra . b, .
Māthuradeśya, adj. .
Mati1, a goddess .
Mati2 = Śiva, .
Matimat1, a king .
Matimat2 = Śiva .
Matināra, an ancient king . Anādhṛṣṭisuta.
Matkulikā, v. Matkuṇikā.
Matkuṇikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Mātrāḥ, pl. = Śiva .
Mātṛ = Śiva .
Mātṛ, pl .
Mātṛtīrtha, a tīrtha .
Mātṛvatsala = Skanda, .
Matsa, v. Matsya2.
Matsya1, a king, son of Vasu Uparicara. When Girikās season came, the pitṛs of Vasu asked him to slay deer when he in the forest was longing for Girikā, he gave his semen, enveloped by an aśoka leaf, to a hawk in order that it should be carried to Girikā persecuted by another hawk, the hawk let the semen fall into the Yamunā, where it was swallowed by the Apsaras Adrikā, who had by the curse of a brahman been transformed into a fish. In the tenth month the fish was caught, and out of its womb came a boy, who was given to Uparicara and afterwards became the king Matsya, and a girl, Satyavatī, who was of a fishy smell, and was retained by the fisherman. When killed, Adrikā assumed her own celestial shape and went away to the regions of the Siddhas, the Ṛṣis, and the Cāraṇas, . next.
Matsya2 = Virāṭa, .
Matsya3 = Uttara, .
Matsya4, the country of the Matsyas .
Matsya5 = Śiva .
Matsya1, pl a people .
Matsya2, pl. .
Matsyā = Satyavatī, .
Mātsya1 = Uttara, .
Mātsya2, a ṛṣi .
Mātsyaka, adj. .
Matsyanagara = Upaplavya, .
Matsyapati = Virāṭa, .
Matsyaputra = Uttara, .
Matsyarāj = Virāṭa, .
Matsyarāja = Virāṭa, .
Matsyarājan = Virāṭa, .
Matsyavīra = Uttara, .
Matsyopākhyāna .
Mattamayūraka, pl a people .
Maudākin, v. Modākin.
Maudgalya, one or more ṛṣis .
maudgalya, adj said of a caste, .
Mauleya, pl a people .
Mauneya, pl a family of Deva gandharvas .
Mauñjāyana, a muni .
Maurava, adj. . b, . f, . Muru.
Mausala1 .
Mausala2 = Mausalaparvan . c, .
. Vaiśam pāyana said When the year was reached, Yudhiṣṭhira beheld many unusual portents . A little while afterwards he heard of the wholesale carnage of the Vṛṣṇis in a battle with clubs, where only Kṛṣṇa and Rāma had escaped with life he summoned his brothers and took counsel with them they were filled with grief the death of Kṛṣṇa they could not believe. Janamejaya inquired about the particulars of the destruction of the Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas. Vaiśampāyana said When the year.... Asked by Janamejaya, cursed by whom the Vṛṣṇis, etc met with destruction, Vaiśampāyana said Sāraṇa, etc saw Viśvāmitra, Kaṇva, and Nārada arrived at Dvārakā they disguised Śāmba as a woman, calling her the wife of Babhru, and asked the ascetics what this one would bring forth. The ascetics answered This Śāmba will bring forth a terrible iron club for the destruction of the Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas, except Rāma and Kṛṣṇa . Then they went to Kṛṣṇa. Informed of what had taken place, Kṛṣṇa summoned all the Vṛṣṇis and told them of it, but did not try to annul the curse. The next day Śāmba actually brought forth an iron club. The fact was reported to the king, who caused it to be reduced into powder and thrown into the sea. At the command of Āhuka, etc the manufacture of spirits was forbidden among all the Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas, under the penance of being impaled alive with all ones kinsmen. All the citizens bound themselves by the rule . Time every day wandered about their houses, like a man of terrible and fierce aspect, bald head, black and tawny of complexion they shot innumerable arrows at him, without being able to pierce him. Also other dreadful portents of calamity were daily seen by the Vṛṣṇis throughout the city . They showed disregard for brahmans, P and etc except Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, etc. When the Pāñca janya was blown in their houses, asses brayed aloud from every direction. Kṛṣṇa, seeing that the day of the new moon coincided with the lunation, summoned the Yādavas and said The lunation has been made the by Rāhu once more, as at the time of the great battle of the Bharatas . He understood that the year had come according to the curse of Gāndhārī, and that the omens were similar to those which Yudhiṣṭhira had noticed when the two armies were arrayed in order of battle. He endeavoured to bring about those occurrences which would make Gāndhārīs words true. He commanded the Vṛṣṇis to make a pilgrimage to some sacred water, and caused the messengers to proclaim a journey to the sea coast . At that time the Vṛṣṇi ladies dreamt every night that a black woman with white teeth, entering their abodes, laughed aloud and ran through Dvārakā stealing the men dreamt of vultures that devoured the Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas in the houses and fire chambers their ornaments, etc were taken away by Rā. The iron discus of Kṛṣṇa, given by Agni, with a nave of adamant, ascended to heaven. Kṛṣṇas chariot was dragged away by his four steeds over the ocean Kṛṣṇas and Baladevas standards, which were reverently worshipped by those two heroes, were taken away by Aps who day and night called upon the Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas to set out on a pilgrimage to some sacred water. They prepared various kinds of edibles and spirits, and set out to Prabhāsa. Uddhava took leave of them and Kṛṣṇa before departing . The Vṛṣṇis, mixing with spirits the food that had been cooked for the brahmans, gave it to apes, and began revels with drinking, so also Rāma, etc. Yuyu dhāna blamed Kṛtavarman for the nightly slaughter, and was applauded by Pradyumna, but was rebuked by Kṛtavarman with having killed Bhūriśravas while sitting in prāya Kṛṣṇa cast an angry glance, and Sātyaki informed him of the story of the gem Syamantaka, which was Satrājits Satyabhāmā, weeping, approached Kṛṣṇa, and sitting on his lap enhanced his anger Sātyaki swore that he would cause Kṛtavarman to follow the five sons of Draupadī, etc, whom he had slain with the help of Aśvatthāman, and he severed his head in the very sight of Kṛṣṇa, and began to strike n others Kṛṣṇa rushed forward to prevent him from ng further mischief, and the Bhojas and Andhakas all assailed him Kṛṣṇa did not interfere they struck Yuyudhāna with the pots from which they had been eating Pradyumna rushed forward to rescue Yuyudhāna they were both slain. Kṛṣṇa in wrath took up a handful of erakā grass, which became a terrible iron club, with which Kṛṣṇa slew all that came before him. The Andhakas, etc also took up blades of the erakā grass, which were converted into iron clubs, and struck one another in consequence of the curse of the brahmans son killed father and vice versa, inebriated with spirits. Beholding that Śāmba, etc were slain, Kṛṣṇa exterminated the Vṛṣṇis and the Andhakas. Babhru and Dāruka told him now to go to Rāma . Dāruka, Kṛṣṇa, and Babhru, seeking Rāma, saw him sitting thoughtfully, reclining his back against a tree. Kṛṣṇa sent Dāruka to inform Arjuna and tell him to come quickly, and he also dispatched Babhru to protect the ladies against robbers but as soon as Babhru had proceeded to a distance, an iron club attached to the mallet of a hunter came and slew him. Kṛṣṇa then, entering Dvāravatī, told his father to protect the ladies till Arjuna came, saying that he would practise penances with Rāma. When he came to Rāma, the latter had applied himself to yoga, and from his mouth issued a huge white Nāga with, heads and red eyes, who proceeded to the ocean, and was received by the ocean and many celestial snakes Karkoṭaka, etc. . After Rāmas death Kṛṣṇa wandered for some time, and then sat n, thinking of Gāndhārī and Durvāsas, and the destruction of the Vṛṣṇis, Andhakas, and Kurus, whence he concluded that the hour had come he then restrained his senses though he was the Supreme Deity, he wished to die in order to dispel all bts, etc and to make the words of Durvāsas true. The hunter Jarā, mistaking Kṛṣṇa for a deer, pierced him at the heel with an arrow coming up, he beheld a man dressed in yellow robes, rapt in yoga, with many arms he became filled with fear Kṛṣṇa comforted him and then ascended upwards, and was received in heaven by Indra, etc. . Meanwhile Dāruka came and informed the Pāṇḍavas of the slaughter of the Vṛṣṇis, etc. . Arjuna with Dāruka proceeded to Dvārakā when Kṛṣṇas, wives saw Arjuna, they uttered a loud cry the city seemed to Arjuna to be the fierce river Vaitaraṇī Arjuna, Satyā, and Rukmiṇī fell n and wailed then praising Kṛṣṇa and comforting the ladies, Arjuna went to Vasudeva, whom he found lying on the ground and burning with grief Vasudeva lamented and said he would die by abstaining from food . Arjuna said that the hour had come for the Pāṇḍavas also for departing he would, however, first remove to Indraprastha the women, the children, and the aged of the Vṛṣṇis. Saying to Dāruka that he wished to see the chief officers of the Vṛṣṇis, Arjuna entered the hall of the Yādavas called Sudharmā, where he said to the citizens and ministers that he would take away with him the remnants of the Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas, as the sea would soon engulf the city Vajra would be their king at Indraprastha they would set out on the seventh day at sunrise. Arjuna passed that night in the mansion of Kṛṣṇa. At dawn Vasudeva by yoga attained to the highest goal the ladies were in despair. His four wives, Devakī, Bhadrā, Rohiṇī, and Madirā, ascended the funeral pyre, and attained to the regions of Vasudeva. When Arjuna had caused Vasudeva and his four wives to be burnt, the boys and the ladies offered oblations of water to Vasudeva. Then Arjuna visited the spot where the Vṛṣṇis had been killed and caused the last rites to be performed, and caused Rāma and Kṛṣṇa to be cremated. On the seventh day he set out, mounting his chariot, with the ladies and children, the Yādava troops, and other inhabitants, with Kṛṣṇas, wives and Vajra they numbered many millions in all. Then the ocean flooded Dvārakā. They proceeded in slow marches. When they had planted their encampment at Pañcanada, the Ābhīras conspired to rob the cavalcade. Arjuna succeeded only with great difficulty in stringing his bow his celestial weapons would not come to his mind the Vṛṣṇi warriors failed to rescue the women, who were snatched away by the robbers Arjunas shafts soon became exhausted formerly they had been inexhaustible. Arjuna became very cheerless he escorted the remnant of the cavalcade to Kurukṣetra he established the son of Kṛtavarman in the city of Mārttikāvata with the remnant of the women of the Bhoja king the remainder, with children and old men and women, at Indraprastha, with Vajra as their ruler the son of Yuyudhāna on the banks of the Sarasvatī the wis of Akrūra, notwithstanding the entreaties of Vajra, entered the woods Rukmiṇī, etc ascended the funeral pyre Satyabhāmā and the other wives of Kṛṣṇa entered the woods in order to practise penances in the contemplation of Hari going beyond Himavat, they took up their abode in Kalāpa grāma. Then Arjuna entered the retreat of Vyāsa . Asked by Vyāsa, Arjuna informed him of what had passed . Vyāsa said that the Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas had been consumed by the brahmans curse it was destiny Kṛṣṇa, as also the Pāṇḍavas, have finished their work the time has come for your departure from the world, etc. . Arjuna entered Hāstinapura and informed Yudhiṣṭhira of what had taken place .
Māvelaka, pl v. Māvellaka, pl.
Māvella .
Māvellaka, pl a people .
Māvelvaka, pl v. Māvellaka, pl.
Maya, an Asura v . b, . Asura, Daitya, Daiteya, Dānava.
Māya = Śiva, .
Māyā .
Māyātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Māyāvin = Śiva .
Mayūra, an Asura .
Mayūraketu = Skanda, .
Mecaka = Śiva .
Meda1, a serpent .
Meda2, name of a caste, .
Medhā, a goddess .
Medhaja, Medhas = Viṣṇu .
Medhātithi1, a ṛṣi . c, .
Medhātithi2, a river .
Medhāvikā, a tīrtha .
Medhāvin1, son of Bāladhi. In ancient times the muni Bāladhi practised austerities in order to have an immortal son. He obtained a son Medhāvin of a very irritable temper, but the gods did not make him immortal they only granted the boon that he should live as long as the mountains existed. Medhāvin grew haughty, and insulted the munis. The learned Dhanuṣākṣa then cursed him, saying, Be thou reduced to ashes. When, however, Medhāvin was not reduced to ashes, Dhānuṣākṣa caused the mountains to be scattered by buffaloes, and then Medhāvin perished. As his father bewailed him, the munis quoted the following gāthā A mortal on no condition can overcome what has been ordained by fate, etc .
Medhāvin2, a brahman .
Medhāvin3 = Viṣṇu .
Meḍhraja = Śiva .
Medhyā, a river .
Medhyāraṇya, a forest .
Medinī, . Pṛthivī.
Medinīpati = Viṣṇu .
Meghahṛt, v. Meṣahṛt.
Meghakāla = Śiva .
Meghamālā, a matṛ. u, .
Meghamālin, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Meghanāda, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Meghapuṣpa, one of Kṛṣṇas horses .
Megharavā, a mātṛ. u, .
Meghasandhi1, a king .
Meghasandhi2, king in Rājagṛha, son of Sahadeva . Māgadha, Magadheśvara, Sahadevaja, Sahadevātmaja.
Meghasaṅghāḥ = Śiva .
Meghasvanā, a mātṛ. u, .
Meghavāhana, a king .
Meghavāhinī, v. Meṣavāhinī.
Meghāvarta = Śiva .
Meghavāsas, an Asura .
Mekala, pl a people .
Melaka, pl v. Mekala.
Menā, a river .
Menakā, an Apsaras .
Menakātmajā = Śakuntalā, .
Meru1, a mountain . g, . h, . i, . d, . f, . u, . f, . c, . b, . b, . b, Sthūlaśiras practised austerities, Moḥ prāguttareoḥ samudrasya ca sarvaratnaiḥ saṅkhyopalānām udakasya vāpi śakyaṃ vaktuṃSuvarṇotpattiGaṅgā dropped the semen of Rudra on MeruĀnuśāsanik.śṛṅge samāsīnaṃ PitāmahaṃChattropānahotpattiprabhāṃ MoḥPage4 b Ānuśāsanik.kāñcanaparvateHastikūṭalibations oflokaĀnuśāsanik.Saṃvartta Maruttīyaat M. Himavatpārśva uttare Marutta caused golden vessels, etc to be made and performed a sacrificeGuruśiṣyas.parvatānāṃ mahā Mḥ sarveṣām agrajaḥ smṛtaḥAnugītāp.r munigaṇair ivaMahāprasthānikap.mahāśailaṃ Mṃ śikhariṇāṃ varaṃ
Meru2, a mountain in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Merubhūta, pl a people .
Merudhāman = Śiva .
Merusāvarṇa, a ṛṣi .
Merusāvarṇi, a ṛṣi .
Meruvraja, the city of the Rākṣasa king Virūpākṣa. b, .
Meṣa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Meṣahṛt, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Meṣapravāha, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Meṣasandhi, v. Meghasandhi.
Meṣavāhinī, a mātṛ. u, .
Miśraka, name of a tīrtha .
Miśrakecī, an Apsaras . b, .
Miśrin, a serpent .
Mīḍhvas = Śiva, q.v.
Mihira = Sūrya, .
Milīmilin = Śiva .
Miñjikāmiñjika .
Mithilā, the capital of the Videhas . b, . b, . f, .
Mithila, pl. .
Mithilādhipa, Mithilādhipati, Mithileśvara = Janaka, q.v.
Mitra, one of the Ādityas . b, . u, . ff, . b, . b, . g, .
Mitrā, an Apsaras. b, .
Mitrabhānu, a king .
Mitradeva, a Kuru warrior .
Mitradharman, a god .
Mitrajña, a god .
Mitrasaha, the proper name of Kalmāṣapāda Saudāsa, .
Mitrasāhvayā, a goddess .
Mitrasena, a Kuru warrior .
Mitravardhana, a god .
Mitravarman1, a Pāñcāla warrior .
Mitravarman2, a Kuru warrior .
Mitrāvaruṇayoḥ putraḥ = Agastya, .
Mitravat, a god .
Mitravinda, a fire .
Mleccha, pl. . c, . e, . b, . b, . c, . f, . d, . b, . b, .
Mleccha, sg said of two Aṅga princes . .
Modāgiri, a mountain .
Modākin, a varṣa in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Modāpura, a city .
Moha = Śiva .
Mohana, a city .
Mohanāstra .
Mohanī, name of a particular spell .
Mohātman = ṛṣṇa, .
mokṣaśāstra, .
Mokṣadharma = Mokṣa dharmaparvan .
mokṣadharma, .
. Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the duties in the four stages of life Bhīṣma indicated the attainment of emanci pation as the highest of all duties. Yudhiṣṭhira asked Bhīṣma how grief might be overcome Bhīṣma related the old story of the conversation between a brahman and king Senajit, burning with sorrow on account of the death of his son dissociation from the world is the grand method of overcoming grief. The brahman cited the verses sung by Piṅgalā about the manner in which she had acquired eternal merit free from hope and desire is felicity. King Senajit experienced delight and became very happy . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired of Bhīṣma as to what constitutes the highest good that man should seek in view of the transient character of time Bhīṣma related the old narrative of a discourse between a brahman, who was devoted to the study of the Vedas, and his son Medhāvin, who was well conversant with the religion of emancipation, and acquainted also with the affairs of the world, on the uncertainty of life and the mutability of all things save Bráhman . Yudhiṣṭhira asked how happiness and misery come to the rich and the poor Bhīṣma related the old narrative of what was sung by Śampāka who had achieved emancipation, told in former times by a poor brahman rendered miserable by a bad wife, etc. the faults of prosperity in renunciation is the highest good of men . Yudhiṣṭhira asked what a man must to find happiness if he be poor. Bhīṣma explained who is a happy man, and related the old narrative of what Maṅki had sung when freed from attachments Maṅki found that he was assiduously med to disappointments at last, with a remnant of his property, he purchased a couple of young bulls with a yoke a camel ran away with them upon its neck Maṅkis observations, quoting Śuka desire is fraught with sorrow . In this connection reference is made to the old verses sung by the Videha king Janaka, who had attained to tranquillity of soul even if the whole of Mithilā be consumed in a conflagration shall incur no loss. Discourse between king Nāhuṣa and Ṛ. Bodhya about free from attachment Bodhyas six preceptors . Yudhiṣṭhira wished to know by what conduct a person may succeed in this world and attain to an excellent end. Bhīṣma related the old story of the discourse between king Prahlāda and a sage who had ated the Ājagara vow the indifference of the latter to all worldly objects in view of the inevitability of death . Yudhiṣṭhira asked which of these, viz. kinsmen, or acts, or wealth, or wis, should be the refuge of man. Bhīṣma answered that wis should be the refuge, instancing Bali, etc and related the old story of the discourse between Indra and Kāśyapa, a Ṛ.s son, who was brought to the ground by a vaiśya negligently driving his chariot, and who in despair resolved to end his life Indra appeared to him in the form of a jackal and proved to him the superiority of his status as a human being and a brahman not to yield to the instigation of the senses constitutes happi ness thou t not regret wine nor the latvāka fowls there is no drink and no food more delicious than these...the vilest Pukkasa or Cāṇḍāla never wishes to give up his life. Kāśyapa gave up the desire of ending his life he knew the jackal to be Indra, worshipped him, and returned home . Yudhiṣṭhira asked whether gifts, sacrifices, penances, and dutiful services to preceptors are productive of merit. Bhīṣmas discourse on righteousness and sin and their respective consequences on life . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about him who has created the universe and to whom it returns when dissolution comes. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the sacred words that M. ṛ. Bhṛgu uttered in reply to the questions of Bharadvāja, on the Kailāsa summit, explaining to him the cosmogony, i.e. Bhṛgu Bharadvāja saṃvāda . Yudhiṣṭhira asked Bhīṣma about the ordinances about conduct. Bhīṣmas discourse on the characteristics of the wicked and the good, and the duties that all men should practise, quoting . ṛ. Nārada one who has abstained from meat should not take meat even if it be sanctified with mantras from the Yajurveda . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discoursed on adhyātma the nature of the three attributes of Goodness, Passion, and Darkness the distinction between matter and soul the highest end to be obtained is emancipation . Bhīṣma discoursed on the four kinds of yoga M. ṛ obtaining a knowledge of the same, attain to eternal success even here . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired after the fruits of the silent recitation of sacred mantras Bhīṣma wanted to recite the old narrative of the discourse between Yama, a brahman, and Time on Sāṅkhya, otherwise called the Vedānta, and Yoga, Bráhman, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the other aims of silent reciters Bhīṣma indicated the different aims realized by different kinds of reciters the nature of the hell into which reciters may sink the regions of Lp etc are hells compared to the region of the Supreme Soul, i.e. to emancipation . Yudhiṣṭhira wished to hear in full the dispute between Time, Mṛtyu, Yama, Sūryas son Ikṣvāku, and a brahman, referred to above Bhīṣma related this old story, i.e. Jāpakopākhyāna . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the results of the yoga of knowledge, of all the Vedas, and of observances and vows Bhīṣma related the old discourse between Manu Prajāpati and his disciple M. ṛ. Bṛhaspati, in days of old, who had studied the Ṛcs, etc. Bṛhaspati asked how an embodied being departs from one body and attains to another acts result from the desire of obtaining happiness and avoiding misery the efforts for the acquisition of knowledge arise from the desire of avoiding both happiness and misery it is by avoiding acts that one succeeds in entering into Bráhman the nature of Bráhman continuation of Manus discourse on the nature of emancipation and the soul the soul takes its character from the body how the soul leaving one body enters into another though invisible, the soul exists continuation of Manus dis course, explaining how the soul may be seen continuation of Manus discourse, explaining how grief may be avoided how Bráhman may be attained abstention from acts is the highest religion . Yudhiṣṭhira asked Bhīṣma about the nature of the Supreme Deity . Bhīṣmas discourse, which he had heard from Rāma Jāmadagnya, etc on the nature of Nārāyaṇa or Govinda, etc. the Asura Madhu Brahmáns seven will born sons, etc. . Madhusūdana created day and night, etc. then from his mouth he created brahmans, from his arms kṣatriyas, from his thighs vaiśyas, and from his feet śūdras, and then he made Dhātṛ the lord and ruler of all created beings Brahmán also became the expositor of the knowledge of the Vedas Virūpākṣa he made the ruler of the spirits and ghosts and Mātṛs Yama the ruler of P. all sinful men Kubera the lord of all treasures Varuṇa the lord of the waters and of all aquatic animals Indra the lord of the gods. In those times men lived as long as they chose, without any fear of Yama offspring was begotten by a fiat of the will. In the Tretā age children were begotten by touch alone. In the Dvāpara age sexual intercourse originated. In the Kali age men have come to marry and live in pairs. The sinful creatures of the earth, born in the southern region and called Andhrakas, etc. in the northern region, the Yaunas, etc. their practices are similar to those of Cāṇḍālas and ravens and vultures in the Kṛta age they were nowhere on earth it is from the Tretā that they have had their origin when the terrible interval came, the kṣatriyas engaged in battle. . ṛ. Nārada, that observer of all the worlds, has said that Kṛṣṇa is the supreme god . Yudhiṣṭhira asked who are the first Prajāpatis, and who the great Ṛṣis, and in which direction they dwell. Bhīṣma enumerated Brahmáns seven sons, mentioned in the Purāṇas as seven Brahmáns. The Prajāpatis that came after these are in Atris race Prācīnabarhis the ten Prācetasaḥ Prajāpati Dakṣa or Ka Marīci had one son Kaśyapa or Ariṣṭanemi. Atri had another son born of his loins, the handsome and princely Soma he performed penances for, celestial yugas. Aryaman and his sons were rulers and creators of all creatures. Śaśabindu had, wives, and begot upon each of them, sons, who would call none Prajāpati save themselves the ancient brahmans call creatures Śāśabindavī this race became the progenitor of the Vṛṣṇi race. These that have named are the illustrious Prajāpatis. The deities are the twelve Ādityas the Aśvins these were first called the gods and the two classes of Pitṛs . Tvaṣṭṛs son was the handsome Viśvarūpa Ajaikapād, etc. these were reckoned as gods at the time of the Prajāpati Manu the Siddhas and Sādhyas, different as to perfect conduct and youth the Ṛbhus and the Maruts were also classes of gods thus are enumerated the Viśvedevās and the Aśvins. Amongst them the Ādityas are kṣatriyas, the Maruts vaiśyas, the Aśvins śūdras the gods Aṅgirasaḥ are brahmans. The person who at morn recites the names of these deities becomes cleansed of all his sins. Yavakrīta, etc and Kaṇva, etc all reside in the east Unmuca, etc in the south Uṣaṅgu, etc in the west Ātreya, etc in the north. These are the witnesses and the creators of all the worlds. By reciting these names one is cleansed of all ones sins by sojourning to these points a person becomes cleansed of all his sins and succeeds in returning home in safety . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the reason of Kṛṣṇas assuming the form of an animal. Bhīṣma said that formerly, while hunting, he arrived at the hermitage of Mārkaṇḍeya, where he was honoured by Ṛ and M. ṛ. Kaśyapa related In former days Dā. and As. Naraka, etc oppressed . and . ṛ. the earth seemed to be oppressed with a heavy weight. The Ādityas repaired to Brahmán, who said that Viṣṇu in the form of a boar would slay the As. Some time afterwards Viṣṇu penetrated into the earth in the form of a boar, and uttering tremens roars, at which even . with Indra became terror stricken, pierced the As. with his hoofs, etc whence he came to be called Sanātana. Brahmán explained to the gods that he was Kṛṣṇa, the Creator of all things, the foremost of yogins, etc he from whose navel the primeval lotus had sprung, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the nature of that high yoga by which emancipation may be attained. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of a discourse between a preceptor and his disciple on emancipation on adhyātma Vāsudeva is the supreme of the universe he is the origin of the Vedas, etc. he created P Ṛ Y Rā N As and men, etc. having reduced every thing into non existence, he once more, in the beginning of a yuga, creates Prakṛti at the end of every yuga the Vedas and all other scriptures disappear in consequence of the grace of Svayambhū, M. ṛ through their penances, first re acquire the Vedas and Itihāsas Svayambhū knows the Vedas, Bṛhaspati their Aṅgas, Bhārgava the Nītiśāstra, Nārada the Gāndharva, Bharadvāja the science of arms, Gārgya the history of the celestial Ṛṣis, Kṛṣṇātreya medicine, diverse other teachers the philosophical systems . Neither . nor Ṛ. were able to apprehend Bráhman only Nārāyaṇa knew it from him Ṛ the foremost As and R. ṛ. of old learnt it. Etymology of Puruṣa . Continuation of Bhīṣmas discourse explaining how the inclinations and instincts of a past life run towards the soul in a new life . Continuation of Bhīṣmas discourse on abstention from acts and the nature of knowledge. Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discoursed on the faults that should be got rid of in order to attain to emancipation . Continuation of Bhīṣmas discourse . Bhīṣmas discourse on the means of conquering the senses . Bhīṣmas discourse on the consequences of attachment to the objects of the senses . Bhīṣmas discourse on the nature and causes of dreams. Darkness has been ated by the Asuras, Bráhman is difficult of attainment by either the gods or the Asuras goodness, passion, and darkness belong to the deities and the Asuras goodness is the attribute of the deities, while the two others belong to the Asuras Bráhman transcends all those attributes it is pure knowledge, and is obtainable only by withdrawing the mind and the senses from all external objects . Who may be said to know Bráhman the distinction between pravṛtti and nivṛtti the respective nature of prakṛti and puruṣa the nature and consequences of yoga . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the conduct by which Janaka the king of Mithilā attained to emancipation. Bhīṣma recited the old narrative of the conversation between Pañcaśikha and Janaka of Mithilā, i.e. Pañcaśikha vākya . Yudhiṣṭhira asked what leads to happiness and what to misery and what to free from fear Bhīṣmas discourse on self restraint . Yudhiṣṭhiras question about the merits of subsisting upon the remnants of sacrifices, and whether fasting be really a penance Bhīṣma explained that though fasting is generally regarded as a penance, it is not so in reality, being rather an impediment to the acquisition of the knowledge of soul living upon sacrificial remnants is regarded as fasting of the highest merit . Yudhiṣṭhira asked whether man should be regarded as the real r of acts. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of a discourse between the Daitya king Prahlāda, who was unattached to worldly objects, etc and Indra, who questioned Prahlāda about the best means by which knowledge of the soul can be attained, etc and was instructed by him. Indra became filled with wonder, and, having worshipped the Daitya king, proceeded to his own abode . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the kind of intelligence by ating which a king deprived of king and prosperity may still live on earth. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the discourse between Indra and Virocanas son Bali, i.e. Bali Vāsava saṃvāda . Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the discourse between Indra and the Asura Namuci, i.e. Śakra Namuci saṃvāda . Yudhiṣṭhira asked as to what is good for a man sunk into dire distress. Bhīṣma discoursed on fortitude, quoting the old narrative of the discourse between Bali and Vāsava, i.e. Bali Vāsava saṃvāda . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the indications of future greatness and future fall. Bhīṣma related the old story of the discourse between Śrī and Śakra, i.e. Śrī Vāsava saṃvāda . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the practices that lead to the attainment of Bráhman. Bhīṣma said that one engaged in the religion of nivṛtti, etc can attain to Bráhman, quoting the old narrative of the discourse between the wise Jaigīṣavya and Asita Devala, who was instructed by Jaigīṣavya to behave indifferently towards praise and blame, etc G Pś and Rā. cannot reach the rank which is his who has attained to the highest end . Requested by Yudhiṣṭhira about the man that is dear to all, Bhīṣma quoted the words that Kṛṣṇa, asked by Ugrasena, said to him on a former occasion on the subject of . ṛ. Nāradas qualifications . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the origin and the end of all creatures, the nature of their thoughts and acts, of the divisions of time, and of the allotted periods of life in the respective epochs or yugas having heard the discourse of Bhṛgu to B. ṛ. Bharadvāja, he had become attached to yoga. Bhīṣma recited the old narrative of what the divine Vyāsa said to his son Śuka about these very questions. Vyāsa said Only Bráhman is without beginning and without end. Ṛ. have measured time thus winks of the eye = kāṣṭhā kāṣṭhās = kalā kalās = muhūrta muhūrtas = day and night days and nights = month months = ayanas = year = day and night of the gods . Moreover, there are the day and night of Brahmán and his years also. Of the Kṛta yuga the duration is, years, with a morning of years and an evening of the other yugas gradually decrease by a quarter. In the Kṛta age all duties exist in their entirety, and all live for years in the other yugas duty, etc decrease by a quarter. The duties for the several yugas are different. In Kṛta penance is foremost, in Tretā knowledge, in Dvāpara sacrifice, in Kali gift. These, years constitute a yuga, yugas = day of Brahmán = night of Brahmán . Brahmán, waking up, modifies the indestructible Bráhman, etc. . Vyāsa explained the creation, etc. . Vyāsa told how the Supreme Lord merges everything into his soul . Vyāsa discoursed on the duties of a brahman they that are good deserve to have even Uccaiḥśravas Satyasandha, having offered his life to save a brahman, ascended to heaven likewise Saṅkṛtis son Rantideva, having given tepid water to Vasiṣṭha Ātreya Indradamána, having given wealth to a deserving person Śibi Auśīnara, having given his limbs and son for the sake of a brahman the Kāśi king Pratardana, having given his eyes to a brahman king Devāvṛdha, having given a costly umbrella Sāṅkṛti Ātreya, having given instructions to his disciples on Bráhman Ambarīṣa, having given eleven arbudas of kine to the brahmans Sāvitrī, by giving away the ear rings Janamejaya, by giving away his own body Yuvanāśva Vṛṣādarbhi, by giving gems, a mansion, and beautiful women the Videha king Nimi gave away his king, Jāmadagnya the whole earth, Gaya the earth with her towns Vasiṣṭha, when the clouds ceased to pour rain, kept alive all creatures Karandhamas son Maruta, by giving away his daughter to Aṅgiras, ascended to heaven king Brahmadatta Pāñcālya, by giving the jewel Śaṅkha king Mitrasaha, by giving his dear wife Madayantī to Vasiṣṭha R. r. Sahasrajit, having given his life for the sake of a brahman king Śatadyumna, having given to Mudgala a house made of gold, etc. the Śālva king Dyutimat, having given unto Ṛcīka his king R. ṛ. Lomapāda, having given his daughter Śāntā to Ṛṣyaśṛṅga R. ṛ. Madirāśva, by giving his daughter to Hiraṇyahasta king Prasenajit, by giving, cows with calves etc. . Continuation of Vyāsas discourse on the duties of a brahman the knowledge that should be acquired knowledge is necessary for emancipation . The different stages of a yogins progress . Asked by Śuka, Vyāsa discoursed on the character of that knowledge which leads to emancipation . Vyāsas discourse on whether acts are obligatory or optional the men of the Tretā, Dvāpara, and Kali yugas are inspired with bts the men of the Kṛta yuga are devoted to penances, etc. In the beginning of the Tretā, the Vedas and sacrifices and the divisions of caste and the several modes of life exist in their entirety in consequence, however, of the duration of life having decreased in Dvāpara, all these things likewise decline in the Dvāpara age, and even in the Kali, the Vedas are overtaken with perplexity towards the close of the Kali again it is btful if they ever become even visible to the eye . Asked by Śuka, Vyāsa discoursed on the import of those duties that lead to emancipation in the feet is Viṣṇu in their arms Indra within the stomach Agni in the ears are the quarters in the tongue is speech which is Sarasvatī success cannot be attained to without knowledge, penances, subjugation of the senses, and renunciation the trine of knowledge as expounded in the Sāṅkhya system . The trine of Yoga . Asked by Śuka, Vyāsa reconciled the declarations of the Veda about acts and abstention from acts . Śuka inquired about how emancipation may be acquired without violating the ordinance about the obligatory character of acts Vyāsas discourse on the duties of brahmacārins . Vyāsas discourse on the duties of the house holder . The duties of the forest stage of life. The fourth stage is based upon the Upaniṣads the duties laid n for it may be observed in all the stages of life equally this stage differing from the others comes after estic and forest life in this very yuga many learned brahmans have been known to observe this stage Agastya, etc were the authors of this course of duties, and themselves observing them have all proceeded to heaven and so also Sudivātaṇḍi, and the numerous Yāyāvaras, etc. freed from fear and not being counted among the stars and planets, are to be seen in the firmament hosts of luminous bodies . Śuka inquired how one leading the forest mode of life should act wishing to achieve emancipation Vyāsas answer about the necessity, after having passed through the first and the second stages, of having recourse to yoga in order to attain to emancipation the duties to be observed by such a man . Vyāsas observations on the soul and the Supreme Soul . Śuka asked what is adhyātma and whence it comes Vyāsas explanation of adhyātma Śuka asked how one may succeed in under standing the unequal distribution of the five elements in different objects, and which among those elements represents which sense, etc. Vyāsas observations on the nature of mind, understanding, and the soul . Continuation . Do. . Śuka inquired about what constitutes the highest duty Vyāsas discourse on duties . Continuation . The relation of the senses and their objects to the five primal elements . Persons conversant with the scriptures succeed in beholding the soul, etc.... the practice of yoga has been recommended by Śāṇḍilya . The tree of desire, its seed and roots and branches and leaves and fruit . Bhīṣma recapitulated the substance of Vyāsas discourse on the respective attributes of the elements . Yudhiṣṭhira lamented the carnage caused on the field of Kurukṣetra. Bhīṣma recited the story of Anukampaka with Mṛtyu Prajāpati saṃvāda . Yudhiṣṭhira asked what is righteousness and whether righteousness is for this world or for the next or for both. Bhīṣmas answer the practices of the good, the Smṛtis, and the Vedas, etc according to Ṛ. of old . Continuation . Inquired of by Yudhiṣṭhira about righteousness Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the conversation of Tulādhāra with Jājali on the topic of righteousness, i.e. Tulādhāra Jājali saṃvāda . Bhīṣma related an old narrative of what was recited by king Vicakhyu through compassion for all creatures, in condemnation of animal slaughter when he saw the mangled body of a bull and heard the painful groans of the kine in a cow sacrifice, and observed the cruel brahmans gathered there to assist at the ceremonies. Manu has applauded harmlessness in all acts...The true brahmans realize the presence of Viṣṇu in every sacrifice. Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma said that one should acquire merit and act in such a way that ones body may not languish and suffer pain, and that death may not come . Yudhiṣṭhira asked whether one should act speedily or with delay. Bhīṣma told the old story of what occurred with respect to the wise Cirakārin, the son of Medhātithi Gautama of the race of Aṅgiras, who came to be called thus because he used to reflect long upon all matters, etc and was regarded as an idle and foolish person. Once M. ṛ. Gautama, witnessing an act of grave misconduct in his wife Ahalyā, in wrath commanded Cirakārin to slay her, and then departed for the woods. Cirakārin began to think for a long while, remembering that the father is the performer of garbhādhāna and sīmantonnayana, etc and that the mother is the sons dhātrī, etc etc. he thought that his mother was not to blame, as Indra had come to her in the form of her husband, etc. When many days had expired Gautama returned, shedding tears of repentance and thinking that the fault committed was due to his own carelessness, and now became filled with great joy, and from that time, dwelling in his hermitage, did not live separately from his spouse or his son. He said Blessed be thou, O Cirakārika thou always reflect long before acting, uttering some verses upon the merits of reflecting long. Gautama at last ascended to heaven with his son . Yudhiṣṭhira asked how a king should protect his subjects without injuring anybody. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the conversation between Dyumatsena and his son king Satyavat, and the words spoken by the latter in behalf of some individuals who had been brought out for execution at the command of his father, quoting the instructions he had received from their grandsires of olden days, as to how kings should rule their subjects in the different ages when the Kali age sets in...fifteen parts of even that one fourth of righteousness disappear, one sixteenth thereof being all that then remains of it, and quoting Manu Svāyambhuva . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the relative superiority of estic life and yoga. Bhīṣma recited the old narrative of the discourse between the Yati Kapila and Syūmaraśmi on animal sacrifices, the obligatory character of acts, and the merits of yoga and renunciation. In days of old when Tcaṣtṛ came to king Nahuṣa, the latter was on the point of killing a cow in order to show him hospitality Kapila said, Alas ye Vedas Ṛ. Syūmaraśmi, entering the cow, blamed this saying of Kapila, etc. the three classes of Pitṛs, etc. . Continuation . Yudhiṣṭhira asked which among the three, viz. religion, profit, and pleasure, is superior. Bhīṣma recited the ancient narrative of the benefit that the cloud Kuṇḍadhāra in days of old had conferred upon a poor brahman that was devoted to him, and who had failed to obtain wealth by worshipping the gods. The brahman worshipped the cloud with dhūpas, etc. the cloud became pleased and said to the brahman that the wise have ordained expiation for brahmanicide, drinking spirits, stealing, etc but not for one that is ungrateful Expectation has a child named Iniquity, Wrath is a child of Envy, Cupidity of Deceit, Ingratitude is barren. After that the brahman, on a bed of kuśa grass and penetrated with the energy of Kuṇḍadhāra, beheld all living beings in a dream, and Maṇibhadra in the midst of the gods employed in giving his orders the gods were engaged in bestowing kings, etc upon men, etc. Kuṇḍadhāra prostrated himself before the gods in the presence of all Y. and prayed for some favour in behalf of the brahman Maṇibhadra first offered to give him wealth, but was prevailed upon by Kuṇḍadhāra to give virtue alone. The brahman became disgusted with the world and entered the woods and practised severe penances, and his mind was firmly set upon virtue his strength did not diminish, and after a long time he acquired spiritual vision, etc. Kuṇḍadhāra then paid him a visit and caused him to see the end that is attained by kings he beheld thousands of kings sunk in hell, and many living in this world embracing lust and wrath, etc. Kuṇḍadhāra said With these all human beings are enchained the gods are afraid of men these vices, at the command of the gods, mar and disconcert on every side no man can become virtuous unless permitted by the gods... The brahman confessed that he had not appreciated Kuṇḍadhāras favour as he ought to Kuṇḍadhāra forgave him and disappeared. The brahman roamed through all the worlds, having attained to ascetic success through the grace of Kuṇḍadhāra. brahmans, Y good men, and Cā. always ae only the virtuous . Yudhiṣṭhira asked what that sacrifice is which is ordained for the sake of virtue alone and not for the acquisition of heaven or wealth. Bhīṣma related the history, formerly recited by Nārada, of a brahman named Satya, who in order to perform sacrifices lived according to the uñcha vow his wife Puṣkaradhāriṇī did not approve of his conduct, but at his com mand she joined a sacrifice where he was the hotṛ. His neighbour the virtuous Parṇāda at the command of Śukra addressed him in the shape of a deer, telling him to slay him and sacrifice with him, and Sāvitrī also told him to so, but in vain Sāvitrī then entered the sacrificial fire but the deer, causing the brahman through spiritual vision to behold Aps. and G at first made him desire to slay the deer, but then won him over to the ahiṃsā religion, and himself assisted him in his sacrifice the injury of living creatures forms no part of sacrifice . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about how one becomes sinful, or virtuous, by what one attains to renunciation, and by what one wins emancipation, whereafter he was instructed by Bhīṣma . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma expounded the means for attaining to emancipation . Continuation of Bhīṣmas discourse, quoting the old narrative of the discourse between Nārada and Asita Devala, whom Nārada questioned about the origin and destruction of all creatures . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired after the means for removing desire. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of what was said by the Videha king to the inquiring Māṇḍavya Even if the whole of Mithilā burn in a conflagration, nothing of mine will be burnt n. The brahman Māṇḍavya became filled with joy and betook himself to the path of emancipation . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the good which one should pursue in view of the transient character of time. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of a discourse between a father, who was devoted only to the study of the Vedas, and his son Medhāvin, who was conversant with the religion of emancipation. The father acted in the way pointed out . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma explained of what behaviour a man should be, of what acts, of what kind of knowledge, etc in order to be able to attain to Bráhman . Yudhiṣṭhira asked when he should succeed in abaning sovereignty for ating renunciation. Bhīṣmas answer stating the certainty of Yudhiṣṭhiras acquisition of emancipation, and quoting that discourse which was sung in days of old, viz. the conversation between Dai. Vṛtra, after he became divested of all his prosperity, and Uśanas Vṛtra said Desirous of fighting Indra, beheld in that battle Hari = Nārāyaṇa, etc. while Uśanas instructed him about Viṣṇu whose head is the infinite place, Sanatkumāra came there and, asked by Uśanas, instructed Vṛtra Viṣṇu is Brahmán, etc. the six colours the four higher regions the indestructible and infinite some say is the region of Mahādeva, etc. . Vṛtra became free from sorrow, gave up his life breaths, and attained to the highest station. Yudhiṣṭhira asked whether Kṛṣṇa is identical with the Supreme Deity Bhīṣma answered in the affirmative. Yudhiṣṭhiras applause of Vṛtra. Bhīṣma said that the Pāṇḍavas would in the end be numbered among the Siddhas . Yudhiṣṭhira asked how Vṛtra, whose virtue and devotion to Viṣṇu and comprehension of the Upaniṣads and the Vedānta were so great, was vanquished by Indra, and how the battle took place. Bhīṣma described the battle, i.e. Vṛtra vadha . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the origin of fever. Bhīṣma narrated the Jvarotpatti . Janame jaya inquired how the horse sacrifice of Prajāpati Dakṣa Prācetasa was destroyed during the age of Manu Vaivasvata by Śiva in consequence of Umās rage and grief, and how Dakṣa was enabled to reunite the divided limbs of that sacrifice. Vaiśampāyana narrated the Dakṣayajña vināśa . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma told the, names by which Dakṣa aed Śiva, i.e. Dakṣa prokta Śiva sahasra nāma stotra . Yudhi ṣṭhira again inquired about adhyātma, and had it explained by Bhīṣma . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired how sorrow and death may be avoided. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the discourse between Nārada and Samaṅga . Yudhiṣṭhira asked what is beneficial for one who is not conversant with the scriptures, etc. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the discourse between Gālava and . ṛ. Nārada about the āśramas, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired how a king should behave in view of the great object of acquisition, and what attributes he should have for freeing himself from attachments. Bhīṣma recited the old narrative that was uttered by Tārkṣya Ariṣṭanemi to Sagara, who asked his counsel. Sagara acquired those virtues which are productive of emancipation and continued, with their aid, to rule his subjects . Yudhiṣṭhira asked why . ṛ. Uśanas Kāvya sided with the Asuras and not with the gods, and whence he came to be called Śukra whence he got such superior excellence, and why he s not succeed in travelling to the centre of the firmament. Bhīṣma related the Bhava Bhārgava samāgama . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about the acts by performing which one wins the highest good both here and hereafter. Bhīṣma narrated what king Janaka in days of yore had inquired of Parāśara about the duties of life. The sceptic argues the deities, G and Dā. have become what they are in consequence of their own nature . Continuation . Rantideva obtained success in all the worlds by worshipping the ascetics with offerings of only roots and fruits and leaves. The royal son of Śibi won the highest regions of bliss by gratifying Sūrya along with his companion with offerings of the same kind...Ṛcīkas son became the son of Viśvāmitra by aing the gods with Ṛcs. Uśanas became Śukra by gratifying the god of gods, and by hymning Devī he sports in the firmament. M. ṛ. Asita, etc by aing Viṣṇu with Ṛcs and by penances attained to success . Continuation. Svayambhū first created Dhātṛ Dhātṛ created a son who was engaged in upholding all the worlds . Continuation. The Asuras could not bear that righteousness that prevailed in the world multiplying they entered the bodies of men then was pride generated in men... at that time the gods repaired to Śiva and imparted to him their conjoined energy, and he felled to earth with a single shaft those three Asuras, viz. Desire, Wrath, and Cupidity, who were staying in the firmament, along with their very habitations, and also the chief of those Asuras the men again obtained their proper natures and began once more to study the Vedas, etc. Then the seven Ṛ. came forward and installed Indra as the chief of the gods, and took upon themselves the task of holding the rod of chastisement over mankind. After the seven R. came king Vipṛthu, etc of the kṣatriya order but there were certain elderly men from whose minds all wicked feelings did not fly away . Continuation. Brahmán by penances created all existent objects Ā etc have all been crowned with success through their penances . Asked by Janaka, Parāśara expounded the reason of the difference of colour in men originally sprung from Brahmán, all the inhabitants of the earth should have been brahmans. Various kinds of kṣatriyas, etc have sprung from the four original orders by intermixture. Janaka asked how those born in pure wombs and those in impure ones all became brahmans. Parāśara said that it was by cleansing their souls by penances, instancing Vasiṣṭha, etc. . Originally only four gotras arose Aṅgiras, Kaśyapa, Vasiṣṭha, and Bhṛgu the others have been due to the penances of those that have founded them . Continuation. Repairing to the Sarasvatī, etc. one should make gifts, etc. . Continuation of Parāśaras discourse on duties. Janaka heard everything the Ṛ. said and obtained great happiness from it . Yudhiṣṭhira asked what opinion should be entertained about the virtues of truth, self restraint, forgiveness, and wis. Bhīṣma recited the old narrative of the discourse between the Sādhyas and a Swan, who was Brahmán wandering through the three worlds, and having come upon the Sādhyas instructing them about the religion of emancipation at last the Sādhyas put a series of detached questions, which were answered by the Swan . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discoursed on the difference between the Sāṅkhya and the Yoga what the kinds of diet are by taking which and what the things are by conquering which a yogin acquires yoga power the yogin can at his will enter into and emerge from Brahmán, etc. ... the yogin has Nārāyaṇa for his soul prevailing over all things, he is capable of creating all things . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discoursed on the principles of the Sāṅkhya these principles have been established by all the puissant Yatis, Kapila, etc. with the objects are engaged men, Pś etc. Viṣṇu is attached to motion, Indra to strength, Agni to the stomach, etc....Sattva is attached to the soul the soul has Nārāyaṇa for its refuge, and he has emancipation for his refuge emancipation is independent of all refuge...the Prajāpatis, etc fall away from their puissance in course of many long ages...the miseries endured by those that fall into the river Vaitaraṇī in the realms of Yama... the swallowing up of the moon and the sun by Rāhu, the falling of stars from their fixed positions and the diversions of constellations from their orbits...lead the Sāṅkhyas to seek emancipation the faults attaching to ones body the knowledge of Vedānta is the island of the ocean of life...Sattva carries the Yatis to Nārāyaṇa Nārāyaṇa carries them to the Supreme Soul . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired whether there is any consciousness in the emancipate state Bhīṣmas answer. Praise of the Sāṅkhya philosophy . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about what s deteriorate and what s not. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the discourse between Ṛ. Vasiṣṭha and king Karāla Janaka, who asked for his instruction. At the end of Brahmáns night, Śambhu of formless soul, etc awakes, and once more creates that first or eldest of all creatures the eldest born being is called Hiraṇyagarbha = Buddhi = Mahat = Viriñci = the unborn in the Sāṅkhya scriptures he has many names... the creations of knowledge and of ignorance bodies are possessed by all bodiless creatures, etc. ...transcending the twenty four topics already adverted to is the twenty fifth called Viṣṇu. There are three colours in all white, red, and dark . Continuation . Do. . Do. That which the Yogins behold is precisely that to which the Sāṅkhyas strive to attain . Continuation . Vasiṣṭhas discourse on what is Vidyā and what is Avidyā. Yogins have great regard for the Sāṅkhya system, as also for the Vedas in the Sāṅkhya system no principle transcending the twenty fifth is admitted in the Yoga it is said that Bráhman... becomes the personal soul only when invested with ignorance in the Yoga scriptures, therefore, both Bráhman and jīva are spoken of . Vasiṣṭhas discourse on buddha and abuddha. had acquired this knowledge from the eternal Hiraṇyagarbha himself, who communicated it to me for my having carefully gratified that great Being of very superior Soul... it has been imparted to thee exactly as had it from Brahmán himself. Bhīṣma said, This knowledge was obtained by Vasiṣṭha from Hiraṇyagarbha, from Vasiṣṭha it was handed over to Nārada, and from this to me . Bhīṣma recited the conversation between king Vasumat, son of Janaka, and a brahman and Ṛ. of Bhṛgus race, whom Vasumat saw in the forests when in pursuit of deer, and by whom he was instructed. R. ṛ. Mahābhiṣa, through want of firmness, fell from heaven Yayāti, though his merits had become exhausted, succeeded in regaining regions of bliss through his firmness. King Vasumat, withdrawing his mind from the pursuit of desire, set it upon the acquisition of righteousness . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discoursed on that which is freed from duty and its reverse by reciting the old narrative of the discourse between Ṛ. Yājñavalkya and king Daivarāti Janaka, who got instruction from Yājñavalkya. The nine kinds of creation . Yājñavalkyas discourse on the creation of the universe, kalpas are said to constitute a single day of the unmanifest one the duration of his night is equal when his night expires he awakes, and first creates herbs and plants he then creates Brahmán or Prajāpati, who springs from a golden egg.. kalpas measure the day of Brahmán, and his night is of equal duration Brahmán then creates Ahaṅkāra, etc. . Yājñavalkyas discourse on the destruction of the universe Brahmán, who is eternal and undecaying, and who is without beginning and without end, repeatedly creates and destroys all created objects when his day expires and night comes he becomes desirous of sleep at such a time the unmanifest and holy one urges the Being called Mahā Rudra, who assumes the form of Sūrya and divides himself into twelve portions, etc. ...Consciousness in his turn is swallowed up by the Great Soul, who is again swallowed up by Śambhu Prajāpati, Aṇiman, etc. ... . Yājñavalkyas discourse on adhyātma, adhibhūta, and adhidaivata . Yājñavalkyas discourse on sattva, rajas, and tamas . Yajñavalkyas discourse of what is possessed of attributes and what is not possessed of them . Yājñavalkyas discourse on the Yoga philosophy, conferring eight kinds of puissance and possessed of eight limbs . Yājñavalkyas discourse on the diverse ends that people attain to as depending on the manner in which the soul escapes from its mortal frame . The story of Yājñavalkyas acquisition of the Yajurveda, as a boon from Sūrya, who had been gratified with his penances Sūrya had said Made up of the essence of speech, the goddess Sarasvatī will enter into thy body he then commanded me to open my mouth Sarasvatī then entered into my body and began to burn, and plunged into a stream, angry with Sūrya, who told me that the burning would soon cease, and then the whole Veda with its appendix and the Upaniṣads would appear in me by inward light, and should edit the entire Śatapatha, and then turn to the path of emancipation, coveted both by Sāṅkhyas and by Yogins. Sūrya then went to the Asta hills. Sarasvatī appeared before me . taught the Śatapathabrāhmaṇa, etc to good disciples and thereby did what was disagreeable to my maternal uncle . undertook the management of the sacrifice of thy father there a dispute arose between me and my maternal uncle as to who should be permitted to appropriate the dakṣiṇā for the recitation of the Vedas in the very presence of Devala took half of that dakṣiṇā thy father and Sumantu and Paila and Jaimini, etc all acquiesced in that arrangement. had thus got from Sūrya the fifteen Yajuṣes, and likewise Romaharṣa learned the Purāṇas . Aided by Sarasvatī and Sūrya then set myself to compile the Śatapathabrāhmaṇa... G. Viśvāvasu, conversant with the Vedānta, once put me twenty four questions relating to the Vedas, and then a twenty fifth having thought of Sarasvatī answered them properly, having expounded to him the fourth science that treats of emancipation, and which is based upon the twenty fifth principle, i.e. jīva. The personal soul and the Supreme Soul should be regarded as one and the same. This Viśvāvasu thought difficult to understand, quoting Jaigīṣavya, etc. M. ṛ. in Brahmaloka say that Āditya himself is thy preceptor. Yājñavalkya instructed him of the relation of the twenty fifth to the twenty sixth . Viśvāvasu proceeded towards heaven, and inculcated the science he had obtained from me to the gods in Brahmaloka, etc. Honoured by Daivarāti, Yājñavalkya left his court the king gave a million of kine, etc to a number of brahmans installing his son in the sovereignty of the Videhas, he ated the practices of the Yatis, and began to study the science of the Sāṅkhyas and Yogins. They who wait upon Mahat attain to the regions of Mahat they who wait upon Consciousness attain to the spot that belongs to Consciousness, etc. got all this knowledge from Janaka, who had obtained it from Yājñavalkya . Yudhiṣṭhira asked how one may avoid decrepitude and death. Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the Bhikṣu M. ṛ. Pañcaśikha and king Janaka Vaideha, who put him that same question and was instructed by him . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira as to how it is possible for a householder to attain to emancipation, Bhīṣma recited the Sulabhā Janakasaṃvāda . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired how in days of old Śuka Vaiyāsaki was won over to renunciation . Bhīṣma recited the discourse of Vyāsa to Śuka expounding the vanity of worldly attachments. That sinful wretch who transgresses the ten boundaries that have been fixed by Svayambhū himself is obliged to pass his time in great affliction in the wild wastes in the inions of the king of the Pitṛs that man who is tainted with cupidity... has to go to deep hells...and is forced to bathe in the broad river Vaitaraṇī, whose waters are scalding, etc. ...Very soon the wind of Yama will blow before thee...By performing the duties of the estic life men attain to the region of Prajāpati or Bṛhaspati or Indra. Śuka, leaving his father, proceeded to seek a preceptor that could teach him the religion of emancipation . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma discoursed on the efficacy of gifts, sacrifices, penances, services to preceptors, etc. . Śukotpatti . Śukakṛti . Śukakṛtya . Śuka Nārada saṃvāda . Śukābhipatana . Yudhiṣṭhira asked who the Supreme Deity is, etc. Bhīṣma recited the old story of the discourse between Nārada and Ṛ. Nārāyaṇa in the hermitage of Badarī, i.e. Nārāyaṇīya, including the story of Uparicara and Brahma Rudra saṃvāda . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira about the foremost duties of men belonging to the different modes of life, Bhīṣma related the discourse on this topic in days of yore between . ṛ. Nārada and Indra, i.e. Uñchavṛtty upākhyāna .
Mokṣadvāra = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva .
Mokṣātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Mṛdu = Śiva, .
Mṛga, pl the brahmans in Śākadvīpa. b, .
mṛga, pl. . Do. = Śiva .
Mṛgabāṇārpaṇa = Śiva .
Mṛgaśiras, name of a nakṣatra, v. Su. Si . Mṛgottama.
Mṛgadhūma, a tīrtha .
Mṛgākṣa = Śiva, .
Mṛgālaya = Śiva .
Mṛgamandā, daughter of Krodhavaśā .
Mṛgasvapnanidarśana .
Mṛgasvapnodbhava .
Mṛgasvapnodbhavaparvan . In consequence of a dream of Yudhiṣṭhira, in which the still remnant deer of Dvaitavana entreated him to spare them by changing his residence, the Pāṇḍavas with Indrasena, etc and the brahmans removed to the Kāmyaka forest, situated at the head of the desert, near lake Tṛṇabindu. They had then dwelt in Dvaitavana during a year and eight months .
Mṛgavāṇārpaṇa, v. Mṛgabāṇārpaṇa.
Mṛgavyādha1, a Rudra .
Mṛgavyādha2 = Śiva, .
Mṛgī .
Mṛgottama, a nakṣatra .
Mṛta = Śiva .
Mṛtapā, an Asura . Amṛtapa.
Mṛttikāvatī, a city .
Mṛtyu1, masc sometimes identified with Antaka and Yama, .
Mṛtyu2 = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva .
Mṛtyu4, fem. Nārada said to Akampana In the beginning the Grandsire Brahmán created all creatures. As the creation bore no sign of decay, he began to think about the destruction of the universe. Failing to find any means of destruction, he became angry, and in consequence of his anger a fire sprang from the apertures of his body and destroyed all creatures. Then Śiva appealed to Brahmán, who said, Thou hast been born out of our wish, and that the Earth, afflicted with the heavy weight of creatures, had asked him to destroy them. Śiva, saying that he had been appointed by Brahmán the protector of creatures, prevailed upon Brahmán to keep his wrath within his own inner self and extinguish the fire. Then Brahmán expounded the trine of pravṛtti and nivṛtti. From his organs of sense then issued a female who was dark, etc and set out for the southern quarter Brahmán called her Death and told her to slay the creatures. She wept, but Brahmán caught her tears with his two hands and implored her who wished to go to the hermitage of Dhenuka to perform austerities to slay the creatures. Soon Brahmán smiled, the creatures continued to live as before, and Mṛtyu proceeded to Dhenuka, where she practised austere vows during twenty one times ten billions of years, and then she wandered, billions of years with the creatures. Next she repaired to Nandā and there passed, years, and became purified from all her sins. Then she went to Kauśikī, where she lived upon air and water only. Then she repaired to Pañcagaṅgā and next to Vetasaka, then to the Gaṅgā and thence to Meru, motionless and suspending her life breaths. Thence to the top of Himavat for a billion of years standing on the toe only of her feet. Then to Puṣkara, and Gokarṇa, and Naimiṣa, and Malaya, with steady devotion to the Grandsire without acknowledging any other god. Brahmán was gratified with her and said that in slaying the creatures she should be without sin Yama and the diseases should become her helpmates. She prevailed upon him that the passions, covetousness, etc should tear the bodies of the creatures before she slew them. Her tears which were in his hands should become diseases springing from the creatures themselves and kill men she should be the virtue of living creatures and the goddess of this virtue. Sin would slay those who were of wicked behaviour it will be thy work to sink them in their sins that are wicked. Nārada further expounded the nature of death and told Akampana not to grieve for his dead son, . b, .
Mṛtyuloka .
Mṛtyupā = Śiva .
. c substantially the same as, but told to Anukampaka .
Mucukunda, an ancient king . b In days of yore Vaiśravaṇa, having been gratified, made a gift of this earth to the rājarṣi M. The latter did not accept the gift, but said, desire to enjoy a sovereignty which is won by prowess of arms. At this Vaiśravaṇa was highly delighted. M. ruled the earth, having conquered it by prowess, . g, .
Mucukunākhyāna . g . King Mucukunda, having subjugated the whole earth, repaired to Kubera in order to test his strength. Kubera created a large force of Rā who annihilated the forces of Mucukunda. Mucukunda rebuked his priest Vasiṣṭha, who then by penances caused those Rā. to be slain. Kuberas haughty address and Mucukundas manly answer.
Mudāvarta, v. Udāvarta.
Mudgala, a ṛṣi . Vyāsa said There lived in Kurukṣetra a virtuous sage named Mudgala, who lived by picking up ears of corn and grain, collecting a droṇa of corn during one fortnight and eating it together with his son and wife the other fortnight yet he celebrated the sattra called iṣṭīkṛta and the darśa and paurṇamāsa sacrifices, where Indra himself and the gods partook of the food offered, and entertained his guests with food, for the remainder of the droṇa of corn increased as soon as a guest appeared, so that hundreds of brahmans were fed with it he lived himself on the food that remained after the gods and the guests had eaten. Having heard of M. Durvāsas, naked and frantic, came to him uttering insulting words, and during six seasons ate up all his food, without perceiving any agitation in M.s heart. Durvāsas then told M. that in reward he should go to heaven even in his own body. Immediately a celestial messenger appeared upon a chariot yoked with swans and cranes, etc and invited M. to ascend it. M. first asked the devadūta to tell him about the advantages and disadvantages of heaven . The devadūta then described heaven, with its advantages myriads of beautiful worlds owned by the gods, the Sādhyas, the Viśve, the maharṣis, the Yāmas, the Dhāmas, the Gandharvas, and the Apsarases Meru extending over, yojanas the gardens of the celestials Nandana, etc. no grief, etc no sweat, stench, excreta, nor urine, nor dust the foremost regions are the regions of Brahmán thither repair sanctified ṛṣis and there dwell the Ṛbhus, the gods of the gods themselves, who suffer no pangs from women, not possess wealth, etc not subsist on oblations nor amṛta, and cannot be perceived by the senses, nor they change at the revolution of a kalpa for them there is neither ecstasy, nor joy, nor happiness, nor misery, etc. they are thirty three in number, to their regions repair wise men after having observed excellent vows, and also M. had acquired that success by his charity. Its disadvantages while reaping the fruit of his acts a person cannot be engaged in any others, for this world is one of acts, the other one of fruition after one has entirely exhausted his merit, he is subject to fall he is then stupefied and agitated by emotions, and when the garlands of those who are to fall fade away, fear invades their hearts but by reason of their merits they take birth among men, and then they attain to high fortune and happiness, while, if one cannot acquire knowledge here, he comes by an inferior birth. As M. did not desire to go to heaven, but asked a region where people have not to lament nor to be pained nor agitated, the devadūta described to him the supreme seat of Viṣṇu, which is called the highest Bráhman and lies above the abode of Brahmán thither only those who are free from selfishness, etc and those who are given to contemplation and yoga, can repair. Then M. bade farewell to the devadūta, and being always engaged in meditation, etc he at last attained to that supreme state of perfection . Therefore, Vyāsa continued, you also, O son of Kuntī, ought not to grieve after the thirteenth year you will get back your king. Having said this Vyāsa returned to his hermitage to practise austerities, . b, . Maudgalya.
Mudgala, pl. . a people .
Mudgara, a serpent .
Mudgaraparṇaka, a serpent .
Mudgarapiṇḍaka, a serpent .
Mudita = Śiva .
Muditā, wife of Saha .
Muharaparṇaka, v. Mudgaraparṇaka.
Muhūrta1, pl. = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva .
Mūka1, a serpent .
Mūka2, an Asura . Rākṣasa.
Mukhamaṇḍikā, a female demon .
Mukhara, a serpent .
Mukhavāditravādin = Śiva .
Mukhya = Śiva .
Muktānāṃ paramā gatiḥ = Viṣṇu .
Muktatejas = Śiva .
Muktimatī, v. Śuktimatī.
Mukunda = Viṣṇu .
Mukuṭa, pl a people .
Mukuṭā, a mātṛ. u, .
Mukuṭin = Indra, .
Mukuṭṭa, pl a people .
Mūla = Śiva .
Mumucu, a ṛṣi .
Muṇḍa = Śiva, .
Muṇḍa, pl a people .
Muṇḍavedāṅga, a serpent .
Muṇḍī, a mātṛ. u, .
Muṇḍin = Śiva, .
Muni1, son of Ahar .
Muni2, son of Kuru .
Muni3 = Śiva .
Muni4, fem mother of the Devagandharvas Mauneyas .
Munideśa, a region in Krauñcadvīpa .
Muniloka .
Munīndra = Śiva, .
Munivīrya, a Viśvadeva .
Muñja, a brahman .
Muñjagrāma, a city .
Muñjakeśa1, a prince .
Muñjakeśa2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Muñjakeśavat = Kṛṣna, .
Muñjakeśin = Viṣṇu, .
Muñjaketu, a king .
Muñjapṛṣṭha, name of a place . Muñjāvaṭa.
Muñjavāsas = Śiva, .
Muñjavat, a mountain . f A peak in Himavat where Śiva is constantly engaged in contemplation, accompanied by Umā, armed with his trident, surrounded by diverse hosts of Bh and aed by R Sā . Yama, Varuṇa, Kubera, etc Bh. and Pś A G Aps Y . ṛ Ā M and Yātudhānas it looks resplendent like the morning sun there is neither heat nor cold, nor sun or wind, nor age, nor hunger, nor thirst, nor death, nor fear on all sides there are gold mines protected by the attendants of Kubera, etc .
Muñjavaṭa, a tīrtha .
Muñjāvaṭa = Muñjapṛṣṭha, .
Mura, v. Muru.
Mūrdhaga = Śiva .
Murmurā, a river .
Mūrtau hi te...sarve vai devatāḥ = Śiva .
mūrtiśāstra, .
Mūrtija = Śiva .
Muru, an Asura, slain by Kṛṣṇa, . c, . f, . b, . Hariv ch. foll.
Mūṣaka, pl a people .
Mūṣakāda, a serpent . Mūṣikāda.
Muṣala, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Muṣalāyudha = Balarāma, .
Mūṣika, pl a people .
Mūṣikāda, a serpent . Mūṣakāda.
Nābha = Śiva .
Nābhāga1, one or more ancient kings . b, .
Nābhāga2 = Ambarīṣa, . Nābhāgi.
Nābhāgāriṣṭa, son of Manu Vaivasvata .
Nābhāgi = Ambarīṣa, . Nābhāga2.
Nabhaḥsthala, Nabhas, Nābhi = Śiva .
Nabhoda, a Viśvadeva .
Nābhya = Śiva .
Nācika, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Nāciketa, a ṛṣi, son of Uddālaki . the next.
Nāciketu, a muni . the prec.
Nācīna, pl a people .
Nadīja = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Nāḍījaṅgha, a crane, son of Kaśyapa . b, .
Nadīsuta = Bhīṣma, .
Nādyopahāralubdha = Śiva .
Nāga, pl sons of Kaśyapa and Kadrū . b, . b, . b, . b foll . b, . d, . d, . b, . d, .
Nāga, adj. .
Nāgaśata, a mountain .
Nāgāśin, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Nāgadatta, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Nāgadhanvan, a tīrtha on the Sarasvatī. g N. is swarming with numerous snakes, it was the abode of Vāsuki and of, Ṛṣis there is no fear of snakes. There the gods had installed Vāsuki as king of all the snakes, .
Nāgadvīpa, a region .
Nāgāhvaya1 = Hāstinapura, .
Nāgāhvaya2, a city of the Nāgas on the Gomatī. b, .
Nāgaloka . c, . b, . c The N. extended thousand of yojanas on all sides, and had many walls of pure gold, and was decked with jewels and gems there were many fine tanks of water with flights of staircases made of pure crystal, and many rivers of clear and transparent water Uttaṅka also saw many trees with diverse species of birds the gate was five yojanas high and yojanas in width, .
Nāgapati, pl. .
Nāgapura, name of a town = Hāstinapura, .
Nāgapurādhipa = Pāṇḍu, .
Nāgapurasiṃha = Pāṇḍu, .
Nāgasāhvaya = Hāstina pura, .
Nāgatīrtha, a tīrtha .
Nagātmajā = Umā, .
Nāgavatman, v. Nāgadhanvan.
Nāgendra = Śiva .
nāgī, .
Nagnajit, a king . c, .
Nagnajita, pl a people or a family .
Nāgodbheda, a tīrtha .
Nahuṣa1, a serpent . Nahuṣa2.
Nahuṣa2, an ancient king, son of Āyus and father of Yayāti, etc for some time king of the gods, but cursed and born as a serpent . N. protected the Pitṛs, gods, Ṛṣis, brahmans, Gandharvas, Uragas, Rākṣasas, etc. having slain the Dasyus, he made the Ṛṣis pay tribute and carry him on their back like beasts of burden, and having conquered the gods, he became Indra, . N. had six sons Yati, Yayāti, Saṃyāti, Ayāti, Ayati, and Dhruva. Yati betaking himself to asceticism, Yayāti became the successor of N. and begot with Devayānī, Yadu and Turvasu, and with Śārmiṣṭhā, Druhyu, Anu, and Pūru, . e, . b, . b, Āyuṣaḥ putraṃrepetition from Ānuśāsanik.sya saṃvādaṃ maharṣeś Cyavanasya caCyavanop.how Cyavana was purchased by N. at the price of a cowĀnuśāsanik.had made gifts of kineŚapathavidhiNahuṣop.sya ca saṃvādam Agastyasya Bhṛgos tathāDevendrasyathe story of N.s becoming the king of the gods and falling from that place and allusion to Ānuśāsanik.abstained from meat during the month of KārttikaKṛṣṇa Vāsudevason of Āyus and father of YayātiĀnuśāsanik.enumerationking of the godsNNNNkulord of the godstvaṃ
Nahuṣa3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Nāhuṣa, Nahuṣātmaja = Yayāti, q.v.
. b Nahuṣa, having acquired the sovereignty of heaven, performed both human and celestial acts, for instance bali and offering of incense and of light, etc. and although he had become the chief of the gods, he yet worshipped the gods as in days of yore. But then he was filled with pride in consequence of the boon he had received from all the gods, and he ceased to perform religious actions for a very long time he used to employ the Ṛ. by turns as the bearers of his vehicles but in consequence of his abstention from religious acts his energy began to diminish when it was Agastyas turn to carry the vehicle, Bhṛgu came to the hermitage of Agastya, and when the latter, mentioning Brahmáns boon to Nahuṣa, and that Brahmán had given him aṃṛta to drink, despaired of being able to curse him, Bhṛgu said that he had come at the command of Brahmán, and that he would curse Nahuṣa to be a snake, when he insulted Agastya by a kick, and this very day he would hurl him n and re establish Indra. Agastya became highly gratified . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma continued Nahuṣa ordered Ṛ. Agastya to carry the vehicle from the banks of Sarasvatī. Bhṛgu, telling Agastya to close his eyes, had entered the matted locks of Agastya, taking care not to cast his eyes upon Nahuṣa. Nahuṣa urged Agastya on with his goad and then struck him on the head with his left foot. Then Nahuṣa was cursed by Bhṛgu and transformed into a snake, but, in consequence of his gifts, etc he retained his memory, and, assisted by Agastya, pacified Bhṛgu, who said that Yudhiṣṭhira would rescue him, and then went to the abode of Brahmán and informed him, while Agastya returned to his own hermitage. Brahmán once more installed Indra in the sovereignty of heaven. Thou hast, O king, rescued Nahuṣa from Bhṛgus curse he ascended to the abode of Brahmán before thy eyes in consequence of the merits he had acquired through acts of the kind have mentioned, he succeeded in once more regaining his lost position. Hence, when evening comes, persons leading the estic mode of life, should give lamps .
Naigameya, a god associated to or a form of Skanda . u, .
Naighaṇṭuka, a collection of Vedic words .
Naika, Naikaśrṅga = Viṣṇu .
Naikadṛś, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Naikaja, Naikakarmakṛt, Naikamaya = Viṣṇu .
Naikapṛṣṭha, pl. .
Naikarūpa = Viṣṇu
Naikasānucara = Śiva .
Naikātman = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Naimiṣa, a sacred forest . i, . b, . c, . n, . o, . Naimiṣāraṇya.
Naimiṣa, pl a people .
Naimiṣakuñja, a tīrtha .
Naimiṣāranya = Naimiṣa1 . o, . b, . Naimiṣa1.
Naimiṣeya, adj. . h, . next.
Naimiṣīya, adj. . h, . o, . prec.
Nairṛta1, pl. = Rākṣasa, pl . u, . x, . b, .
Nairṛta2, pl a people .
Nairṛta, adj. . u, .
Nairṛti, an Asura. b, .
Naiṣāda, adj. . b, .
Naiṣadha, pl a people = Niṣadha, pl .
Naiṣadha1 = Nala, q.v.
Naiṣadha2, the king of the Niṣadhas at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira .
Naiṣadhya, adj. .
Naiṣādi1 = Ekalavya, .
Naiṣādi2 = Ekalavyasuta, .
Naiṣādi3 = Kāyavya, .
Naiṣādi4 = Ketumat, .
Naiṣādi5, a Kuru warrior .
naiyāyika, .
Nāka, name of a weapon .
Nakṣatra1, mostly pl . Do. = Śiva .
Nakṣatranemi = Viṣṇu .
Nakṣatrapati = Soma, .
Nakṣatrarāj =, .
Nakṣatrarāja =, .
Nakṣatrasādhaka, Nakṣatravigrahamati = Śiva .
Nakṣatrin = Viṣṇu .
Nakta, Naktañcara1 = Śiva . Do. pl . Bhūta, pl.
Nakula, Pāṇḍava . e Taught by Droṇa, N. became an atiratha, . N. assailed Rohītaka and vanquished there the Mattamayūrakas, etc. Vāsudeva and Śalya accepted his sway, etc camels carried with difficulty the treasures he had earned when he returned to Indraprastha, . e Yudhiṣṭhira said to Sañjaya N. was formerly sent under your eye to conquer the Śibis and the Trigartas, and brought the western region under my power, . f N. had vanquished the whole western region teeming with Mlecchas, . l N. was borne by excellent steeds presented by Mahendra, and like to the Wind in might and speed, bis, ʹ, . Āśvineya, Aśvinīsuta, Aśvisuta, Ājamīḍha3, Bhārata, Bharataśreṣṭha, Bharatarṣabha, Dāmagranthi, Granthika, Kuruśreṣṭha, Mādravatīputra, Mādravatīsuta, Mādreya, Mādrinandana, Mādrinandanaka, Mādrī putra, Mādrīsuta, Mādrītanūja, Pāṇḍava, Pāṇḍaveya, Pāṇḍunandana, Pāṇḍuputra, Pāṇḍusuta, Yama, Yamaja .
Nākula, pl a people .
Nakuladāyāda = Śatānīka, q.v.
Nakulākhyāna . b At the conclusion of Yudhiṣṭhiras horse sacrifice, after everybody had been gratified, a blue eyed mungoose, with one side of its body changed into gold, came and said, in voice as loud and deep as thunder, that this great sacrifice was not equal to a prastha of powdered barley given away by a liberal brahman of Kurukṣetra, who was observing the uñcha vow. Asked by the brahmans the mungoose related The brahman named lived with his wife, son, and daughter in law, and practised penances he used to eat every day at the sixth division during a famine he had nothing to eat day after day one day in the month of Jyaiṣṭha, while the sun was in the meridian, he was picking up grains of corn, but got nothing one after the sixth division had come, he obtained a prastha of barley, which they reduced to powder for making saktu having finished their recitations and libations, etc they divided the powdered barley among themselves, so that each got a kuḍava then came a guest, who ate all the portions, the wife, son, and daughter in law with difficulty prevailing upon the brahman to give their portions as well. The guest turned out to be Dharma flowers were rained n from heaven . ṛ, G Devadūtas, etc and B. ṛ. standing in vimānas and dwelling in Brahmaloka were struck with wonder have been rescued, and others who have not yet come have been rescued for countless yugas he that gives away having, having, and a handful of water having no wealth, are equal in merit, citing Rantideva, Nṛga, and Śibi Auśīnara thou hast conquered Brahmaloka. The brahman, with his wife, son, and daughter in law, proceeded to heaven on a celestial chariot. The mungoose continued came out of my hole, and by the contact with the powder of barley, etc my head and half of my body became gold in order to convert the rest of my body into gold repeatedly repair to the hermitages of ascetics and to the sacrifices of kings came hither with high hopes, but have not been made into gold. Then the mungoose disappeared . That mungoose was Dharma, who having injured Jama dagni had been cursed by the Pitṛs, but became freed from the curse by disparaging himself in the form of Yudhiṣṭhira .
Nakulānuja = Saha deva, .
Nakulasya suta, Nakulātmaja, Nākuli = Śatānīka, q.v.
Nala1, king of the Niṣadhas, son of Vīrasena, and husband of Damayantī . also the following synonyms Naiṣadha, . Niṣadhādhipa, . Niṣadhādhipati, . Niṣadharājendra, . Niṣadheśvara, . Puṇyaśloka, . Vīrasenasuta
Nala2, a monkey .
Nālā, a river .
Nalakānana, pl a people .
Nalakūbara, a son of Kubera . b . N. cursed Rāvaṇa, who had ravished Rambhā, the spouse of N that he should never be able to violate an unwilling woman, . x, .
Nalinī, a river . f, . next.
nalinī, said of Kuberas lotus tank . the prec.
Nalopākhyāna, i.e. Nalopākhyānaparvan .
. One when the Pāṇḍavas were grieving for Arjuna, Bhīma asked Yudhiṣṭhira to permit him to go and slay Duryodhana, interpreting the time to be complete, but he did not prevail upon Yudhiṣṭhira. While they were conversing the great ṛṣi Bṛhadaśva came before them, and, asked by Yudhiṣṭhira if there was on earth a king more unfortunate than himself, he said that he would narrate a history of a prince more miserable than Yudhiṣṭhira, viz. Nala, who, defeated deceitfully by Puṣkara, dwelt in the woods with his spouse, having neither slaves nor chariots nor brothers nor friends with him . Bṛhadaśva said The Niṣadha king Nala, the son of Vīrasena, was above all kings, etc and fond of dice. The Vidarbha king Bhīma was granted by the Brahmarṣi Damana a daughter, Damayantī, and three excellent sons, Dama, Dānta, and Damana. Both Nala and Damayantī had not their equals in beauty, and, continually hearing of each others virtues, they conceived attachment to each other, though they had never seen each other. Once Nala in his garden saw a number of golden winged swans and caught one of them, but let it loose, as it promised to speak well of him before Damayantī. The swans having arrived at the Vidarbha country, the one who had been caught by Nala led Damayantī to a secluded spot and fulfilled its mission. Damayantī caused it to speak to Nala of her . As Damayantī became sick of love, her father invited all the kings to her svayaṃvara. At this time the ṛṣis of the gods Nārada and Parvata, having arrived in course of their wanderings at the regions of Indra, told him that the kings did not now come to him because they were intent on the svayaṃvara of Damayantī. Hearing this, the Lokapālas set out on their vehicles for the svayaṃvara, but seeing Nala on the way and filled with astonishment at his beauty, they left their chariots in the sky and asked Nala to be their messenger . Nala promised to so, but when Indra told him to go to Damayantī and tell her that Indra, Agni, Varuṇa, and Yama desired her to choose one of them for her lord, he asked them to spare him as he had come with the same object but, as they insisted that he should stand by his promise, he by their power entered without being perceived by the guardians into the apartments of Damayantī, and, saying his name, fulfilled his mission . Damayantī declared that if she did not become the wife of Nala himself she would resort to poison, or fire, or water, or the rope. Nala advised her to choose one of the gods, maintaining that having come in a different mission he dared not seek his own interest. Damayantī then told him to come to her svayaṃvara in company with the gods, then she would choose him, at which no blame would be his, and Nala returned to the Lokapālas and told them what had happened . At the sacred hour of the holy lunar day of the auspicious season Bhīma summoned the kings to the svayaṃvara, and that assembly of kings resembled the Bhogavatī swarming with Nāgas. Damayantī, beholding five persons all alike in appearance, and recollecting the marks of the celestials, of which she had heard from old people, was unable to distinguish which of them was Nala. Filled with grief, she then decided upon seeking the protection of the gods themselves, and prevailed upon them that they assumed their true shapes. Thereupon she beheld the gods unmoistened with perspiration, with unwinking eyes and unfading garlands, not stained with dust, and staying without touching the ground, while Nala was revealed by his sha, his fading garlands, and by his being stained with dust and sweat, and resting on the ground with winking eyes. She then chose Nala, seizing the hem of his garment and placing a floral wreath round his neck. Nala promised Damayantī that he would remain hers as long as he lived, and she spoke words of like import to him. The Lokapālas bestowed each a couple of boons on Nala Indra, that he should be able to behold his divine nature in sacrifices, and blessed regions thereafter Agni, his own presence wherever he wished and regions as bright as himself Yama, subtle taste in food and pre eminence in virtue Varuṇa, water wherever he desired and garlands of celestial fragrance. Then the gods went to heaven and the kings returned home. Nala, after the wedding, stayed there for a time, returned home, ruled righteously, and celebrated the horse sacrifice, etc. He begat the son Indrasena and the daughter Indrasenā upon Damayantī . When the Lokapālas were returning they met Dvāpara with Kali going to the svayaṃvara, and Indra told Kali that Damayantī had already chosen Nala. As Kali threatened to avenge himself he was rebuked by the Lokapālas, as Nala had studied the four Vedas with the Ākhyāna as the fifth, etc. When the gods had gone to heaven, Kali said that he would take possession of Nala and deprive him of his king, and asked Dvāpara to enter the dice . Kali then went to the country of the Niṣadhas and always watched for an opportunity. At last, in the twelfth year, when Nala, after answering a call of nature, touching water had said his twilight prayers without having washed his feet, Kali entered his person. Then Kali becoming Vṛṣa prevailed upon Puṣkara, that he challenged Nala to a match of dice in order to acquire his king. Nala and Puṣkara gambled together for many months, Nala being always worsted no one amongst his friends could succeed in dissuading him from the play at last they came in a body, which was told by the sūta to Damayantī, who in vain represented it to Nala he uttered not a word in reply . Seeing that Nala had lost everything, Damayantī told her nurse and maidservant Bṛhatsenā to summon the councillors in the name of Nala and tell them what had been lost the councillors approached Nala, and Damayantī informed him that the citizens had come again in a body, but he regarded her not. She then caused Bṛhatsenā to summon the sūta Vārṣṇeya, who at her request yoked Nalas favourite horses and brought her two children to Kuṇḍina . There he left the children, the chariot, and the horses, and went to Ayodhyā, where he entered the service of king Ṛtuparṇa as a charioteer . At last, when Puṣkara had won all Nalas wealth and his king, he proposed to him to stake Damayantī. But Nala, feeling as if his heart would burst and gazing at Puṣkara in anguish without speaking a word, took all the ornaments off his body, and attired in a single piece of cloth left the city accompanied by Damayantī. They stayed for three nights in the outskirts of the city, living on water alone. Nobody showed him hospitable regards, as Puṣkara had proclaimed through the city that he that should show any attention to Nala would be put to death. After many days Nala saw some birds of golden hue and covered them with his cloth in order to catch them, but they rose up to the sky taking away that garment of his, and then told him they were the dice that had come hither to take away even his cloth. Nala proposed to Damayantī to leave him, pointing out to her the roads to Avantī, Ṛkṣavat, Vindhya, Payoṣnī, Vidarbha, Kośala, and the south. But she would not leave him, but suggested that they should go to Vidarbha . Nala refused to appear before Bhīma in his state of misery. They went on attired in the same piece of cloth. Once when Damayantī had fallen into a profound slumber in a shed for travellers, Nala, influenced by Kali, resolved upon deserting Damayantī, as separated from him she might perchance wander to her relatives. With a sword that he found near the shed he cut off one half of the cloth and throwing the instrument away departed, having first returned again and again, dragged away by Kali, but drawn back by love . When Damayantī awoke, she lamented and cursed the being through whose imprecation Nala suffered woe, saying that it should lead a still more miserable life. Thereupon, wandering on, she was seized by a gigantic serpent and rescued by a hunter as the hunter, after comforting her, tried to force her to love him, he was cursed by her and fell n lifeless upon the ground . Description of the forest, Damayantīs lamentations. She went in a northerly direction for three days and nights, then she came to an asylum of ascetics, who told her that she should again become happy together with Nala. Then the asylum disappeared. Sometime after wards, having proceeded a long way, she met with a body of merchants landing on the banks of a river its leader was Śuci, and it was bound for the city of the Cedi king Subāhu . Damayantī followed the caravan. Once, at midnight, the caravan was destroyed by wild elephants and many men were trodden to death, which some ascribed to their not having worshipped Maṇibhadra or Vaiśvavaṇa, the kings of Yakṣas, others to their having received Damayantī, whom they thought to be a Rākṣasa or Piśāca or Yakṣa woman, and resolved upon killing her when they saw her. Hearing this Damayantī fled. The next day the remnant of the caravan left the place. Damayantī, with the brahmans that had survived the slaughter of the caravan, came towards evening to the city of the Cedi king Subāhu. The boys began to follow her when she came before the palace of the king, the queen mother let the nurse take her in. Damayantī agreed to stay there on the conditions that she should not eat remnants, not wash anyones feet, nor speak with other men, but be protected against all aspirations. The queen gave her as a sairindhrī to her daughter Sunandā . Nala, having deserted Damayantī, saw a conflagration in the forest and therefrom heard a voice calling him by name and saw the Nāga Karkoṭaka, who unable to stir, told him that he had deceived the great ṛṣi Nārada and been cursed by him with the words Stay thou here immobile until Nala takes thee hence, then thou shalt be freed from my curse, and asked him to deliver him and promised to instruct him in respect of his welfare. The snake then became as small as a thumb, and Nala taking him up went to a spot free from fire. Karkoṭaka let him proceed yet counting his steps, and bit him at the tenth step . Then the form of Nala was changed, in order that people might not recognize him, and Karkoṭaka assumed his own form, and said that Kali dwelling in Nala should be tortured by his venom, and that Nala should have no fear from animals with fangs, from enemies, and from men versed in the Veda, and told him to go to Ayodhyā and present himself as a sūta Bāhuka before Ṛtuparṇa, who would give Nala his skill in dice in exchange for Nalas knowledge of horses, and when he had become an adept at dice he should have prosperity and meet with his wife and children and regain his king. The Nāga king then gave Nala two pieces of celestial cloth, saying that when he desired to get back his own form he should remember him and wear this garment. Then he disappeared . On the tenth day Nala entered the city of Ṛtuparṇa he approached the king and named himself Bāhuka, and said that he surpassed everybody in managing steeds and might be consulted in matters of difficulty and affairs of skill, and that he was versed in the art of cooking. Then he was appointed superintendent of Ṛtuparṇas horses on a pay of, and Vārṣṇeya and Jīvala should be under his direction. Every evening he recited the śloka, Where lies that helpless one afflicted with hunger and thirst and worn with toil, or upon whom s she now wait Once Jīvala asked him who she was, and Nala related to him the main features of his story without naming her or himself . Bhīma sent out brahmans in all directions to search for Nala and Damayantī, promising, kine, etc to him that should find them. At length the brahman Sudeva, the friend of Damayantīs brother, recognized Damayantī in the city of the Cedis, seated with Sunandā during the time of the kings prayers, and told her who he was and that her relatives and children were well. Beholding Damayantī weeping and conversing in private with Sudeva, Sunandā caused her mother to question Sudeva . Sudeva told the story of Damayantī, and that he had recognized her by a mole between her eyebrows, which was now almost covered with dust as her whole body. Then Sunandā washed away the dust and the queen mother recognized her by the mole as the daughter of her sister, as she and Damayantīs mother were both daughters of the Daśārṇa king Sudāman, and she herself had been bestowed on Vīrabāhu and her sister on Bhīma she had witnessed Damayantīs birth in the palace of her father in the Daśārṇa country. At her own request Damayantī was brought in a litter carried by men and protected by a large escort to the city of Bhīma, and was received with respect and worshipped the gods and brahmans. Bhīma gave unto Sudeva, kine, etc. The next day Damayantī let her mother cause Bhīma to send brahmans out in all directions to seek for Nala. Damayantī ordered them everywhere to recite the ślokas O beloved gambler, where hast thou gone, cutting off half of my garment, etc but to take care that no one knew that it was on her command . After a long time the brahman Parṇāda told that he had in Ayodhyā visited Bhāṅgāsuri, and that Bāhuka had been affected by hearing his śloka, and had said to him Chaste women, though overtaken by calamity, yet protect themselves, etc. Damayantī then thanked Parṇāda and promised him great wealth and consulted with her mother, and, without Bhīmas knowing it, sent Sudeva, who told Ṛtuparṇa that to morrow Damayantī would hold another svayaṃvara . When ordered by Ṛtuparṇa to conduct him to the svayaṃvara of Damayantī, Bāhuka felt his heart bursting with grief, but promised to go there in a single day he yoked four horses born in Sindhu, made Vārṣṇeya sit on the chariot, and set out with so great speed that Vārṣṇeya thought he must be Mātali or Śālihotra, who had taken a human shape, or Nala . As the chariot was coursing thus, Ṛtuparṇa lost his upper garment, and Nala declared that it was impossible to recover it, as they had already travelled one yojana thence. As Ṛtuparṇa rightly indicated the number of fruits of a vibhītaka tree, and said he was skilled in dice as in numbers, Nala prevailed upon him to teach him the science and in future receive instead his science of horses. Then Kali came out from the body of Nala, vomiting the poison of Karkoṭaka, and assumed his own shape, as the fire of Damayantīs curse had left him, but remained invisible to others except Nala. Kali prevailed upon Nala that he should not curse him, promising that those men who would attentively recite his history should be free from fear of him, and entered the vibhītaka tree till Nala had gone far away. Then Kali returned to his abode. From the touch of Kali the vibhītaka tree from that hour fell into disrepute. Nala now became free from calamity, though he did not assume his original form . At night they arrived at Kuṇḍina, having passed yojanas. The steeds of Nala that were in that city, and peacocks and elephants and Damayantī recognized the sound of Nalas chariot Damayantī ascended the terrace with the desire of seeing Nala. The Kośala king wondered, as he did not hear any talk of the svayaṃvara, etc and Bhīma thought that he had come simply to pay his respects. When Ṛtuparṇa had gone to his appointed quarters with Vārṣṇeya, and Bāhuka, having tended the horses, was sitting at the side of the chariot, Damayantī sent a female messenger in search of Nala . The female messenger Keśinī asked Bāhuka about Vārṣṇeya and himself he said that Vārṣṇeya was the charioteer of Nala, that nobody knew Nala except Nala himself and his wife, as he did not discover his marks of identity anywhere, and that he himself was the charioteer and cook of king Ṛtuparṇa at last she repeated the śloka of Parṇāda O beloved gambler, etc and said that Damayantī wished again to hear the reply he had given Parṇāda then Bāhuka, weeping, said Chaste women, though overtaken by calamity, etc and Keśinī went to Damayantī and acquainted her with everything . Damayantī again sent Keśinī to stay in silence at Bāhukas side and mark his conduct she related that low passages grew in height so that he might pass through them easily, that when he approached narrow holes opened wide, that only by his looking upon them the vessels became filled with water, that when he held a handful of grass in the sun the fire blazed up all of a sudden, that he touched fire and was not hurt, that water falling at his will flowed in a stream, and that flowers pressed with his hands became gayer and more fragrant than before. Damayantī then caused Keśinī without Bāhukas knowledge to bring her some meat that had been boiled and dressed by him, from the kitchen, and recognized the taste. She then sent her two children with Keśinī. Bāhuka embraced them crying aloud, saying they were like his own children, and sent Keśinī away lest people might think evil . Having obtained the consent both of her father and mother, Damayantī caused Nala to be brought to her apartments it came to an explication Damayantī declared that she had feigned to hold a second svayaṃvara because no one except Nala could in one day manage yojanas with horses, and swore by the Air, Sun, and Moon, who had been her protector for these three years, and Vāyu bore witness to the truth of her words. Then a floral shower fell there, and the celestial kettledrum began to play. Nala then wore the garment he had received from the serpent king and regained his old form. Thus Nala in the fourth year was reunited with his wife . The next day they presented themselves before Bhīma. The citizens were in great joy and aned the temples, etc. Ṛtuparṇa asked Nalas forgiveness, and Nala also asked Ṛtuparṇas forgiveness, and made over to him his horse lore, having obtained from him the mystery of dice. Then Ṛtuparṇa went away to his own city, employing another person as his charioteer . Having dwelt for a month at Kuṇḍina, Nala set out for the Niṣadha country with a single white chariot, sixteen elephants, fifty horses, and infantry, and proposed to Puṣkara that they should gamble again, as Nala had won great wealth the stake should be Damayantī, wealth and king, and their lives if not, he proposed a single combat. Puṣkara, hoping to win Damayantī, whom he loved, gladly consented to gamble, and lost at a single throw. Nala, declaring that it was Kali who had e it all, forgave his brother and granted him his portion, and after a month let him go to his own town. All the citizens and subjects rejoiced at Nalas return . Then Nala with a large force brought Damayantī and his children home, and passed his days in joy and performed numerous sacrifices with abundant gifts to brahmans. So thou also, O Yudhiṣṭhira, wilt blaze forth in effulgence soon. They that will repeatedly recite this history of Nala and they that will hear it recited will never be touched by adversity. As Yudhiṣṭhira feared that some one skilled in dice might summon him, Bṛhadaśva taught him the science of dice and then went to Aśvaśiras for a bathe. Yudhiṣṭhira then learnt from brahmans and ascetics from various directions that Arjuna was still engaged in ascetic penances, and Yudhiṣṭhira grieved for him .
Nāmanāmika = Mahāpuruṣa .
Namas, Namaskāra = Śiva .
Namuci, an Asura, slain by Indra . s, . b, . b, . b, . Asura, Asuraśreṣṭha, Daityasattama.
Namucighna = Indra, .
Namucihan = Indra, .
Nanda1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Nandaka1.
Nanda2, a drum in Yudhiṣṭhiras standard .
Nanda3, a cowherd. f, .
Nanda4, a serpent .
Nanda5, two warriors of Skanda. u, .
Nanda6 = Viṣṇu .
Nandā, wife of Harṣa .
Nandā, a river . b, .
Nandāśrama, a sacred place .
Nandaka1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Nanda1.
Nandaka2, a serpent .
Nandaka3, the sword of Kṛṣṇa .
Nandaka4, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Nandakin = Viṣṇu .
Nandana1, a celestial forest . bis, . b, . b, . b, vanaṃ, Viśvarūpa dwelt therePunarāvartanandāhaving bathed in Punarāvartanandā, etc one after death repairs to N.Hastikūṭa.differently PCR.lokaḥvanaṃUmā Maheśvarasaṃv.ādiṣuAśvamedhikap.Aśvināv iva Ne
Nandana2, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Nandana3 = Śiva .
Nandana4 = Viṣṇu .
Nandi1, a Devagandharva .
Nandi2, a follower of Śiva. g, . Nandīśvara, Nandin.
Nandi3 = Śiva .
Nandi4 = Viṣṇu .
Nandīśvara1, a follower of Śiva . Nandi, Nandin.
Nandīśvara2 = Śiva, q.v.
Nandigrāma, a city .
Nandikara = Śiva .
Nandikuṇḍa, a tīrtha .
Nandimukha = Śiva .
Nandin1, a follower of Śiva . Nandi, Nandīśvara.
Nandin2 = Śiva .
Nandin3 = Viṣṇu .
Nandinī, the cow of Vasiṣṭha, .
Nandinī, a tīrtha .
Nandinī, a mātṛ. u, .
Nandisena, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Nandivardhana = Śiva .
Nandivega, pl a people .
Naptṛ, a Viśvadeva .
Napuṃsaka = Śiva .
Nara1, a god or ṛṣi with whom Arjuna Pāṇḍava is identified . g, Sabhākriyāp. Nārāyaṇau, performed sacrifices at BindusarasDyūtap.Kṛṣṇañ ca Jiṣṇuñ ca Hariṃ Nñ ca, invoked by DraupadīKṛṣṇañ ca Viṣṇuñ ca Hariṃ Nñ ca, invoked by DraupadīKṛṣṇa Vāsudeva= Arjuna Nārāyaṇāv ṛṣī, = Arjuna and KṛṣṇaArjunaNārāyaṇasahāyavān, in Badarī, = ArjunaKairātap.pūrvarṣiḥ = ArjunaIndralokābhigamanap. Nārāyaṇau yau tau purāṇau ṛṣisattamau ...Hṛṣīkeśa Dhananjayau Nārāyaṇāv ṛṣīDhaumyatīrthak.Vāsudeva Dhanañjayau...N Nārāyaṇāv ṛṣīTīrtha yātrāp. Nārāyaṇau cobhau sthānaṃ prāptāḥ sanātanaṃGandhamādanapr.viśālā Badarī yatra N Nārāyaṇāśramaḥ Nārāyaṇāśramaḥ, i.e. Badarīāśramaṃ...N Nārāyaṇāśritaṃ, Nārāyaṇasthānaṃ BhāgirathyopaśobhitaṃSau gandhikaharaṇaviśālā Badarī... N Nārāyaṇāśramaḥ Nārāyaṇasthānaṃ Badarīty abhiviśrutaṃ Nārāyaṇāśramaṃ, = BadarīArjunaSureśvaraṃ, had per formed austerities in Badarī, = ArjunaNara Nārāyaṇaupūrvadevau...N Nārāyaṇāv ṛṣī Nārāyaṇauhad vanquished the Paulomas and the Kālakhañjas, sc. as Arjuna, Nivātakavacayuddhaparvan Nārāyaṇau devau pūrvādevāv iti śrutiḥPhālgunaḥ, i.e. ArjunaDambhodbhavop.o Nārāyaṇaś caiva tāpasau NārāyaṇauN. and Nārāyaṇa humiliated DambhodbhavaBhagavadyānap. Nārāyaṇau... Arjuna KeśavauMātalīyop. Nārāyaṇāv ṛṣīGālavacarita NārāyaṇauJiṣṇuṃBindusaras Nārāyaṇau, at BindusarasJambūkh.o Nārāyaṇaś caivaBhagavadgītāp.s tvam asi, sc. Arjuna Nārāyaṇau, = Arjuna and Kṛṣṇaerror in C B. has tathānaghaḥ instead of tathā NaraḥBhīṣmavadhap.Nārāyaṇa will be born among men together with N. Nārāyaṇau purāṇāv ṛṣisattamau Nārāyaṇāv ṛṣī Nārāyaṇau devau, = Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa Nārāyaṇau Nārāyaṇau devau, = Arjuna and KṛṣṇaDroṇābhiṣekap.pūrvadevau...N Nārāyaṇau, = Arjuna and KṛṣṇaPratijñāp. Nārāyaṇau, Nārāyaṇāv ṛṣī, Jayadrathavadhap.Nārāyaṇānugaḥ = ArjunaNārāyaṇaborn by means of the tapas of Nārāyaṇa, = ArjunaKarṇap. Nārāyaṇau, = Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa Nārāyaṇāv...etau purāṇāv ṛṣisattamau, Nārāyaṇau devau, Rājadh. Nārāyaṇāśramaṃ, i.e. Badarī Nārāyaṇāv ṛṣī, in BadarīMokṣadh.sya, sc. sthānaṃmuniśreṣṭham, if the soul issues through the neck, one goes to N.Nārāyaṇīyaread Naro, among the four sons of Dharma born from Nārāyaṇa, viz. N Nārāyaṇa, Hari, and KṛṣṇaNārāyaṇa Nau, in Badarī Nārāyaṇābhyāṃ, discourse between Nārada and N. and Nārāyaṇa Nārāyaṇāv ṛṣī, = Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa Nārāyaṇau, in Badarī Nārāyaṇau, = Arjuna and Kṛṣṇaāpo vai Nsūnavaḥ NārāyaṇauN. and Nārāyaṇa fought with Rudra o Nārāyaṇaś caiva Dharmakulodvahau devaśreṣṭhau Nārāyaṇau devasattamau Nārāyaṇau Nārāyaṇāv ṛṣī Nārāyaṇau, discourse between them and Nārada Nārāyaṇau Nārāyaṇāśramaṃ Nārāyaṇau, continua tion Nārāyaṇaucontinuation Nārāyaṇa Nārāyaṇāśrame Nārāyanāv ṛṣījanma Dharmagṛhe... N NārāyaṇātmakaṃSvargārohaṇik. p.in Badarī Nārāyaṇāv etau sambhūtau manuṣyeṣu, = Arjuna and KṛṣṇaPutradarśanap.ṛṣim imaṃ Pārthaṃ Dhanañjayaṃ, i.e. ArjunaMahābhāratacf. the introductory ślokas of books Nārāyaṇau
Nara2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Nara, pl a class of Gandharvas .
Nārada1, a Devarṣi, son of Parameṣṭhin, often mentioned together with Gandharvas and therefore presumably himself a Gandharva. Nārada2 bis . b, . b, bis, . d, . ii, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, instructed by Nārāyaṇainstructed VyāsaUñchavṛttyup.maharṣiṇāmaharṣiḥrelated the Uñchavṛttyupākhyāna to IndraĀnuśāsanik.attends on Śiva with song and musicḥ Parvataś caiva, came to see Bhīṣmasya ca saṃvādaṃ Vāsudevasya cobhayoḥdiscourse between N. and Kṛṣṇaa saying of his is quoted.sya ca saṃvādaṃ puṃścalyā Pañcacūḍayādevarṣiḥdiscourse between N. and Pañcacūḍādevadarśanaḥdiscoursed to Bhīṣma on gifts of foodDevakyāś ca saṃvādaṃ maharṣer Nsya cadevadarśanaṃdevarṣiḥdiscourse between Devakī and N.ḥ Parvataś caiva, sungŚapathavidhi ParvatauĀnuśāsanik.discoursed to BhīṣmaNandanaNandanaṃ NsyaĀnuśāsanik.a saying of his is quotedworshipped the kine Parvatau, came to KṛṣṇadevarṣiḥNārāyaṇasuhṛtUmā Maheśvarasaṃv.related the discourse between Śiva and UmāĀnuśāsanik.ṛṣayaḥ...NpramukhāḥSāṅkhyayogaḥUtathyasent by Utathya to VaruṇaKapa. pl.Ānuśāsanik.enumerationSvargarohaṇik. p.had told Bhīṣma that Kṛṣṇa was NārāyaṇaAśvamedhikap.had instructed YudhiṣṭhiraSaṃvartta Maruttīyadevarṣiṇāmaharṣiṇādirected Marutta to seek Saṃvartta for his ṛtvijAśvamedhikap.had comforted YudhiṣthiraPage5 a devarṣiṇāBrāhmaṇagītāsya ca saṃvādam ṛṣer Devamatasya cadiscourse between N. and DevamataAnugītāp.had taught Arjuna that Kṛṣṇa was the supreme godpresent at the aśvamedha of YudhiṣṭhiraĀśramavāsap.ḥ Parvataś caivadevarṣiḥdivyadarśītold Dhṛtarāṣṭra that only three years of life were left for himPutradarśanap.ḥ Parvataś caivaall. to ch. Nāradāgamanap.devarṣiḥreported the death of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Gāndhārī, and KuntīMausalap.cursed Śāmba, etc.knew Kṛṣṇa to be ViṣṇuMahāprasthānikap.praised Yudhiṣṭhirasya vacaḥSvargārohaṇap.in heavenMahābhāratarecited the Mahābhārata to the gods
Nārada2, a Devagandharva . u, .
Nārada3, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Nāradāgamana .
. Vaiśampāyana said Two years after their return from the retreat of Dhṛtarāṣṭra the Pāṇḍavas were visited by . ṛ. Nārada. Yudhiṣṭhira inquired after Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc. Nārada said After thy return from Kurukṣetra, Dhṛtarāṣṭra proceeded towards Gaṅgādvāra with the sacrificial fire and Gāndhārī, Kuntī, Sañjaya, and all the yājakas. They themselves took to severe austerities, while the sacred fire was duly worshipped by the yājakas. They wandered about, Sañjaya acting as a guide, Pṛthā becoming the eye of Gāndhārī. Once Dhṛtarāṣṭra bathed in the Gaṅgā, and was returning to his retreat. A violent forest conflagration set in Dhṛtarāṣṭra dismissed Sañjaya and sat n, facing the east, with Gāndhārī and Kuntī they concentrated their soul, and were burnt by the conflagration. Sañjaya escaped and was seen by me on the banks of the Gaṅgā in the midst of ascetics he bade them farewell and started for Himavat. In the course of my wanderings saw the three bodies. The ascetics, from whom heard all the details, did not at all grieve for them. Vaiśampāyana said The Pāṇḍavas and the citizens felt great grief . Yudhiṣṭhira lamented . Nārada comforted Yudhiṣṭhira by informing him of the sacred character of the fire that had burnt Dhṛtarāṣṭra and the two queens. When Dhṛtarāṣṭra entered the woods he caused his sacrificial fires to be duly ignited having performed his sacred rites with them he abaned them all then the Yājakas had left them in a solitary part of the wood and gone away the fires thus left to themselves produced a general conflagration this is what have heard from the ascetics on the Gaṅgā. Vaiśampāyana said Headed by Yuyutsu the Pāṇḍavas and the citizens all proceeded to the Gaṅgā in order to offer oblations of water to the deceased king and queens. Then they came back, taking up their residence outside the city. Yudhiṣṭhira sent, a number of men to the retreat to cremate the remains of his uncle, aunt, and mother in due form. On the twelfth day he performed the śrāddhas with gifts in abundance . Then all returned to Hāstinapura. The great Ṛ. Nārada, having comforted Yudhiṣṭhira, went away. Dhṛtarāṣṭra had passed three years in the forest and fifteen years in the city. Yudhiṣṭhira was plunged in grief .
. b Ṛ. Nārada and his sisters son Parvata had in days of old left heaven for a pleasant ramble on earth in order to taste clarified butter and rice. They wandered under a compact of telling each other their inmost thoughts. They arrived at the court of Sṛñjaya . Nārada was taken with the charms of Sṛñjayas daughter Sukumārī but shamefulness prevented him from disclosing his love to Parvata, who then cursed him for his reticence, saying that Sukumārī should become his wife, but then she and every man should behold him in the shape of an ape. Nārada cursed Parvata in return, saying that he should not succeed in proceeding to heaven. Parvata began to wander over the earth. Sukumārī beheld Nārada as an ape, but devoted herself entirely to him, and did not desire any Mu or Y. for a husband. Nārada and Parvata, after some time, became reconciled and withdrew their mutual curses. Sukumārī fled, thinking Nārada to be somebody else, but was informed by Parvata. Parvata proceeded to heaven and Nārada to his home. Kṛṣṇa continued Ṛ. Nārada is here he will tell thee everything that happened .
Nāradin, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
nārāḥ = āpaḥ, .
Naraka1, an Asura, son of Bhūmi and slain by Kṛṣṇa . pṛthiviñjayaḥ, in the palace of VaruṇaRāja sūyārambhap. Muruñ ca Narakañ caiva śāsti yo Yavanādhipaḥ, name of a countryKṛṣṇa VāsudevaBhaumaṃ, Kṛṣṇa slew N. and recovered the ear rings Nisunda Nau hatau, destroying the bonds of Muru, Kṛṣṇa slew Nisunda and N. and made safe the way to Prāgjyotiṣa Harivaṃśa, v. foll.Gandhamādanapr.asthīni Daityasya Nsya, in the northAindraṃ...sthānaṃDaityendrātNivātakavacayuddhap.Prahlāda Nau, have been defeated by IndraGhoṣayātrāp.hatasya Nsyātmā Karṇamūrtim upāśṛtya, possessed KarṇaKarṇo py āviṣṭacittātmā Nsyāntarātmanā, Kṛṣṇa VāsudevaBhaumaḥ, robbed the ear rings of Aditi, bBhaumaṃ, slain by Kṛṣṇa, Yānasandhip.had been defeated by KṛṣṇaBhagavadyānap.Page5 a aḥ saha Dānavaiḥ, bŚārṅganirjitya Nṃ Bhaumam āhṛtya maṇikuṇḍale, bDroṇābhiṣekap.had been slain by KṛṣṇaVaiṣṇa vāstraBhūmi, the mother of N. asked the Vaiṣṇava weapon for her son, from him it passed over to BhagadattaSaṃśaptaka vadhap.had been slain by KṛṣṇaKarṇap.yathā Kṛṣṇena No Muraś ca nihataḥ, bRājadh.santrāsarakṣamaṇdalakāriṇe Viṣṇave, i.e. KṛṣṇaMokṣadh.Dānavamukhyāḥ...Nādyā mahāsurāḥBali Vāsavas.among the ancient rulers of the earthNārāyaṇīyaBhaumaṃ, will be slain by Nārāyaṇa, incarnate as Kṛṣṇa
Naraka2, tīrtha .
naraka, .
naramedha, .
Nārāṇāṃ patiḥ = Śiva, .
Nara Nārāyaṇau. d Once Bṛhaspati and Uśanas went to Brahmán, and also the Maruts with Indra, the Vasus with Agni, the Ādityas, the Sādhyas, the seven ṛṣis, the Gandharva Viśvāvasu, the guṇas of Apsarases, and having bowed n to Brahmán they sat around him. Just then the two ancient deities, the Ṛṣis Nara and Nārāyaṇa, left the place. Bṛhaspati said to Brahmán Who are these two that leave the place without worshipping thee Brahmán said that they were Nara and Nārāyaṇa who had come from the world of men to the world of Brahmán worshipped by the gods and the Gandharvas they exist only for the destruction of the Asuras. Indra went to the spot where those two were practising austerities, accompanied by all the gods headed by Bṛhaspati. At that time the gods had been very much alarmed in consequence of a war with the Asuras. Indra obtained the boon that Nara and Nārāyaṇa assisted him in the battle . Both of them, by their acts, enjoy numerous eternal and celestial regions, and are repeatedly born in the times of war. Even this is what Nārada, conversant with the Vedas, had said to the Vṛṣṇis.
Nararāṣṭra, v. Navarāṣṭra.
Nararṣabha = Śiva .
Narasiṃha . b, .
Nārasiṃha, adj. . c, . d, . b, .
Nārasiṃhavapus = Viṣṇu .
Naravāhana = Kubera, q.v.
Nārāyaṇa, name of an ancient god or ṛṣi, the son of Dharma, commonly connected with Nara, but also the name of the Supreme God, from whom the son of Dharma was born . g, . b, . b, . b, Vāsudeva Dhanañjayau...Nara Nāv ṛṣīViṣṇuḥ, in BadarīdevaṃdevaḥAgastyop.= Viṣṇuc enumeration of the incarnations of N. Tīrthayātrāp.Nara Nau cobhau sthānaṃ prāptāḥ sanātanaṃPlakṣāvataraṇag.āśramaṃGandhamādanapr.viśālā Badarī yatra Nara NāśramaḥVarāhāvatāradevaṃ = Viṣṇu, became incarnate as a boarGandhamādanapr.Nara Nāśramaṃ, i.e. Badarīāśramaṃ...Nara Nāśritaṃ, Nara Nsthānaṃ BhāgīrathyopaśobhitaṃKṛtayuga= Viṣṇu, is white in the KṛtayugaSaugandhikāharaṇaviśālā Badarī...Nara NāśramaḥNara Nāśramaṃ Badarīty abhiviśrutaṃNara Nāśramaṃ, i.e. BadarīYakṣayuddhap.āśramaṃ, i.e. Badarīanādinidhanaṃ devaṃ prabhuṃ, = Viṣṇusthānaṃ, east of Meru, Hariṃ, Ājagarap.sthāna, i.e. BadarīMār kaṇḍeyas.āṅkaprakhyas tvaṃ, sc. MārkaṇḍeyaetymologyŚaṅkhacakragadādharaḥ, during the cataclysm Mārkaṇḍeya saw N who expounded to him his own nature. Mārkaṇḍeya entered the stomach of N.Dhun dhumārop.= Viṣṇu, filled Kuvalāśva with his own energyArjunasahāyakaṃ, sc. Naraṃ, i.e. ArjunaViṣṇuākhyaḥ, = Viṣṇu= =, etymologyKarṇaKṛṣṇa is N.Pāṇḍavapr.introductory ślokaDurgāvarapriyāṃ, sc. Durgāṃyathā Padmā NparigrahaḥSainyodyogap.introductory śloka= KṛṣṇaNara Nārāyaṇaupūrvadevau...Nara Nāv ṛṣīNara Nauhad slain AsurasNara Nau devau pūrvadevāv iti śrutiḥ= KṛṣṇaYānasandhip.= Kṛṣṇa, etymologyDambhodbhavop.Naro Nś caiva tāpasauNara NauNara NauNara and N. humiliated DambhodbhavaBhagavadyānap.yasya sc. Arjunas No bandhuḥNara Nau... Arjuna KeśavauMātalīyop.Nara Nāv ṛṣīGālavacaritaKṛṣṇaḥ, in BadarīNara Nauṃ devaṃ Naraṃ vā Jiṣṇuṃreme...yathā No LakṣmyāṃRathātirathasaṅkhyānap.Guḍākeśo Nsahāyavān, = KṛṣṇaJambūkh.introductory ślokaBindusarasNara Nau, at BindusarasJambūkh.Naro Nś caiva sarvajñaḥ sarvabhūtakṛtBhūmip.sakhaḥ, sc. the mountain KṛṣṇaHariḥ, resides on the mountain Gomanda Bhagavadgītāp.Naraḥ ...Nsahāyavān, = KṛṣṇaNara Nāvṛṣī, = Arjuna and KṛṣṇaBhīṣmavadhap.ādipadmaṃ...Nnābhijātaṃ= Kṛṣṇa= Viṣṇu, praised by Brahmán, who prevailed upon him to become incarnate Nara Nau purāṇāv ṛṣisattamauNara Nāv ṛṣīNara Nau devau, = Arjuna and KṛṣṇaNara NauNara Nau devau, = Arjuna and KṛṣṇaDroṇābhiṣekap.introductory śloka= Kṛṣṇapūrvadevau...Nara Nau, = Arjuna and KṛṣṇaAkampanasamaḥ, sc. Hari, the son of AkampanaPratijñāp.e jayaḥ, = KṛṣṇaNara Nau, = Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa, Nara Nāv ṛṣī, Jayadratha vadhap.Naro Nānugaḥ, = Kṛṣṇaastre Nsamaḥ, sc. SātyakiNārāyaṇāstramokṣap.gave the Nārāyaṇa weapon to Droṇadescriptionbrahmabhūtaḥci.e. Śivagiven in full as Kṛṣṇa VāsudevaKarṇap.introductory ślokaNara Nau, = Arjuna and KṛṣṇaTripurākhyāna= Viṣṇu, in the arrow of ŚivaKarṇap.= KṛṣṇaKeśavena, = KṛṣṇaNara Nāv etau purāṇāv ṛṣisattamau, = Arjuna and KṛṣṇaPināka Ncakrasannibhaṃ...khavaraṃNara Nāv ṛṣī, = Arjuna and KṛṣṇaŚalyap.introductory ślokaSauptikap.introductory ślokaJalapradānikap.introductory ślokaRājadh.intro ductory ślokaRājadh.Hariḥ, = Kṛṣṇa= = Hariṃ = Nparaṃ Brahma Nparaṃ tapaḥ Npara devaḥ sarvaṃ Naḥ sadā= Kṛṣṇadevaḥ, father of Virajasgītaṃ, a sentence of his quotedViṣṇuṃ...sarvabhūteśvaraṃanādi madhyanidhanaṃ, i.e. ViṣṇuĀdidevaṃ, i.e. Viṣṇu, showed himself in the form of Indra to Māndhātṛbhaktā Nṃ devaṃbhaktā Nṃ Hariṃdaṇḍo hi bhagavān Viṣṇur daṇḍo Nḥ prabhuḥNara Nāśramaṃ, i.e. BadarīNara Nāv ṛṣī, in BadarīMokṣadh.Hṛṣīkeśaṃ, etc = Viṣṇu ṛṣir Nḥ, described the religion of pravṛttiPage5 a Anukampakasamaḥ, sc. Hari the son of AnukampakaMokṣadh.Hariḥ, i.e. Viṣṇu, ātmakaṃ, description of the nature of the Supreme God= yogī...Nātmādeve, i.e. the Supreme God= ātmānaṃ, = = = NārāyaṇīyaNāradasya ca saṃvādam ṛṣer Nsya caviśvātmā caturmūrtiḥ sanātanaḥthe eternal N. was born as the son of Dharma in a fourfold form, viz. as Nara, N Hari, and KṛṣṇaNara Nau, in BadarīNara Nābhyāṃi.e. the son of Dharma, Nārada came to Nara and Nārāyaṇa in Badarīuttamapūruṣeṇa, i.e. the son of Dharma= UparicaraHariṃdevaṃ Hariṃthrough the grace of N. the seven ṛṣis composed a treatise on dutiesdevaṃ Nātmakaṃdevaṃparāḥ, Ekata, Dvita, and Trita repaired to Śvetadvīpa, but in vain attempted to get a sight of N.viśvasṛg havyakavyabhukparo bhūtvā Njapaṃ japan, sc. Vasu Uparicarajapyaṃ Nmukhod gataṃHariḥ, sent Garuḍa to bring Vasu Uparicara to heavenNārāyaṇīya, guṇāśrayāt... tamasaḥmukhodgataḥ...brāhmaṇāḥnīla
Nārāyaṇa, pl a tribe of cowherds .
Nārāyaṇa, adj. . b, . g, .
Nārāyaṇāstra . Nārāyaṇa, adj.
the of the minor parvans of the Mhbhr. . THE LAST PART OF THE TH DAY. After the fall of Droṇa, the Kurus, even Duryodhana, etc fled away, Kṛtavarman with the remnant of his Bhoja troops, etc Suśarman with the remnant of the Saṃśaptakas. Only Aśvatthāman did not flee Aśvatthāman Śikhaṇḍin, etc. . Aśvatthāman asked Duryodhana why the troops were fleeing away, even Karṇas troops Duryodhana caused Kṛpa to inform Aśvatthāman of the truth, at which Aśvatthāman was filled with rage . Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sañjaya what Aśvatthāman said, he who knew the weapons of men and Vāruṇa, etc. . Sañjaya related Aśvatthāman complained before Duryodhana that his father has been killed, and vowed to destroy the Pāñcālas and the Pāṇḍavas neither nor G As U Rā etc were able to vanquish him there were none equal to him and Arjuna in knowledge of weapons he had a weapon that neither Arjuna, etc. knew, given by Nārāyaṇa to his father as a boon, with the promise that no man should ever be his equal in battle only, this weapon must never be used in haste, etc and never be hurled upon persons that aban their chariots or weapons in battle, etc. with this he would rout and slay the Pāṇḍavas, etc. . The Kuru army rallied many blew their conches, etc. the Pāṇḍavas took counsel of one another Aśvatthāman touched water and invoked the Nārāyaṇa weapon . Fierce omens in nature appeared. Dā and G. became inspired with fear. Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sañjaya what counsel was ated by the Pāṇḍavas in order to protect Dhṛṣṭadyumna on seeing the retreating Kauravas once more advance to battle, rallied by Aśvatthāman. Sañjaya related Yudhiṣṭhira spoke about the matter to Arjuna, fearing that it was Indra himself who was approaching for the sake of the Kauravas. Arjuna in reply described the prowess of Aśvatthāman and the unrighteousness of the Pāṇḍavas in slaying Droṇa all of us have passed the greater part of our lives the days that remain to us are few this exceedingly unrighteous act has stained that remnant did not interfere, as he was about to be slain for this fault have already sunk into hell, overcome with shame . Bhīmasena, reproaching Arjuna, vindicated the deed can, with my arrows, rout the united . with Indra at their head, and As U and men. Then Dhṛṣṭadyumna spoke in justification of his conduct . Asked by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related All the other persons present remained silent Arjuna, glancing obliquely towards Dhṛṣṭadyumna, seemed to reproach him with tears and sighs Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. stood ashamed Sātyaki wrathfully rebuked Dhṛṣṭadyumna . Dhṛṣṭa dyumna in reply taunted Sātyaki with the slaughter of Bhūriśrasas . Sātyaki rushed towards Dhṛṣṭadyumna in order to slay him Bhīma, urged by Kṛṣṇa, held him back Sahadeva endeavoured to bring about a reconciliation Dhṛṣṭadyumna asked Bhīma to let him slay Sātyaki then he or Arjuna would slay the enemies. Kṛṣṇa and Yudhiṣṭhira restored peace with great difficulty, and all the warriors proceeded to battle . Aśvatthāman caused a great carnage among the Pāṇḍava troops before Duryodhana he repeated his vow . Duryodhana rallied his troops. Aśvatthāman invoked the Nārāyaṇa weapon . The Pāṇḍavas, etc became exceedingly agitated. Yudhiṣṭhira, relying on Kṛṣṇa, advised Dhṛṣṭadyumna to flee away with his Pāñcālas, and Sātyaki with the Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas he and his brothers would ascend a funeral pile . Kṛṣṇa prevailed upon the troops to lay n their weapons and alight from their chariots. Bhīmasena alone refused to so, and dissuaded the others . Arjuna said that his vow was that the Gāṇḍīva should not be used against the Nārāyaṇa weapon, kine, and brahmans. Bhīma attacked Aśvatthāman, but was overwhelmed by the energy of the Nārāyaṇa weapon . Arjuna covered Bhīmasena with the Vāruṇa weapon, Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa, alighting from their chariot, proceeded on foot towards Bhīma and forcibly brought him n from his chariot, making him aban his weapons. Then the Nārāyaṇa weapon became neutralized all the quarters became clear, etc. The Pāṇḍava host stood arrayed once more. Duryodhana urged Aśvatthāman to use the same weapon once more Aśvatthāman said that it could not be used twice if brought back it would without bt slay himself. Duryodhana then urged him to slay the enemies with other weapons. Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked, what then came to pass Sañjaya related Dhṛṣṭadyumna Aśvatthāman, who deprived Dhṛṣṭadyumna of his steeds, driver, and chariot the Pāñcālas fled away. Sātyaki Aśvatthāman, who was worsted by him. Duryodhana, etc Sātyaki, who made them flee away deprived of their chariots. Aśvatthāman Sātyaki, who once more deprived him of his chariot and caused him to retreat the Pāṇḍavas blew their conches, and Sātyaki slew of Vṛṣasenas division, etc. . Aśvatthāman Sātyaki Aśvatthāman repeated his vow Sātyaki was carried away by his driver. Aśvatthāman Dhṛṣṭadyumna, who was much afflicted Arjuna, etc Aśvatthāman, who slew Sudarśana, Paurava, and the young Cedi prince. Bhīma Aśvatthāman Bhīma was carried away by his steeds the Pāñcālas fled away . Arjuna Aśvatthāman Arjuna addressed Aśvatthāman in harsh words . Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sañjaya about the cause of this, as Arjuna and Aśvatthāman loved each other. Sañjaya said that it was in consequence of his grief . Aśvatthāman became angry with Arjuna and especially with Kṛṣṇa, touched water, and made use of the Āgneya weapon, from which dire omens in nature appeared, and a great slaughter in the Pāṇḍava army resulted Rā. and Pś. uttered fierce cries, etc. . Arjuna invoked the Brāhma weapon the darkness was dispelled, etc. a full akṣauhiṇī of the Pāṇḍava troops had been killed Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna were unwounded the Pāṇḍavas rejoiced, the Kauravas wondered, Aśvatthāman was disconsolate, and ran away from the fight he met Vyāsa, and asked him the reason neither As nor G Pś Rā U Y and birds, nor men can baffle this weapon. Vyāsa told him the story of Nārāyaṇa Nara and Nārāyaṇa are Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa even Aśvatthā man has been born as a portion of Rudra, and was endued with great wis, regarding the universe to consist only of Mahādeva, etc and Śiva had granted him numerous boons, and he had, in every Yuga, aed the great god in his Phallic form. Kṛṣṇa had sprung from Rudra himself, and always worshipped him, regarding his Phallic emblem as the origin of the universe, and he viewed the identity of Bráhman with the universe Si and M. ṛ. ae Kṛṣṇa in order to attain to Mahādeva Kṛṣṇa is the Creator of everything the eternal Kṛṣṇa should be aed with sacrifices, etc. Aśvatthāman bowed unto Rudra, regarded Kṛṣṇa as worthy of the highest regards, and became filled with delight, the marks whereof appeared on his body. Bowing to Vyāsa, he caused the army to be withdrawn, and so did also the Pāṇḍavas. Having fought for five days.. Droṇa repaired to Brahmaloka . Arjuna met with Vyāsa and inquired of him about the invisible person who aided him in the battle Vyāsa said that it was Mahādeva himself, and recited a long enumeration of his attributes if Mahādeva becomes angry, neither nor As G Rā even if they hide themselves in deep caves, can have peace. In days of yore Mahādeva destroyed the sacrifice of Dakṣa the Sacrifice fled away, and . and As. fell n and submitted to Mahādeva, the Nāgas and Ṛ. became agitated, etc. Pūṣan was eating the puroḍāśa Śiva tore out his teeth the gods assigned to Rudra a substantial share in sacrifices he then re established the sacrifice. Then Vyāsa related the destruction of Tripura . He is Rudra, etc. . Explanation of some of the names of Mahādeva . Blessings upon the reader, especially the readers of the Śatarudriya .
Nārāyaṇī = Indrasenā, .
Nārāyaṇīya, adj. . b, .
b . Bhīṣma said heard it from my father that in the Kṛta age, during the epoch of Manu Svāyambhuva, the eternal Nārāyaṇa, the Soul of the universe, took birth as the son of Dharma in a quadruple form as Nara, Nārāyaṇa, Hari, and the Self existent Kṛṣṇa. Amongst them all, Nārāyaṇa and Nara practised the several austerities, repairing to the Himālayan hermitage Badarī and riding in their golden chariot . Nārada dropped n on Gandhamādana from a summit of Meru and wandered over all the world, and at last repaired to Badarī at the hour of Naras and Nārāyaṇas performing their daily rites. He said to himself this is truly the abode of that Being in whom are established all the worlds including As G K and M. U. in this spot Kṛṣṇa and Hari dwelt formerly what is that deity whom these two worship who are these Pitṛs whom these two Pitṛs of all beings ae Ṛ. Nārada, bowing unto Mahādeva, praised Nārāyaṇa, and asked what god or Pitṛ he was sacrificing to. Nārāyaṇa said that about this topic nothing should be said, as it was an ancient mystery but because of his devotion he instructed him about Kṣetrajña, etc. The twenty one Prajāpatis Brahmán, etc. were first born, and obeyed the eternal law of the Supreme God . Nārada proceeded to Śvetadvīpa to behold Nārāyaṇa in his original shape by yoga he soared into the firmament, rested for a short while on a summit of Meru, then he directed his eyes towards the north west, and north of the milky ocean he saw the large island Śvetadvīpa, more than, yojanas from Meru the inhabitants of that realm have no senses, etc. they are white and free from every sin, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira asked for further information about this people. Bhīṣma related the story of Uparicara, the essence of all narratives, which he had heard from his father . Arrived at Śvetadvīpa, Nārada stood in yoga and hymned Nārāyaṇa . Nārāyaṇa showed himself to Nārada, bearing all forms, uttering with his mouths Gāyatrī, oṃ, and the Āraṇyaka, and the four Vedas he mentioned Ekata, Dvita, and Trita, and instructed Nārada . Vāsudeva = Soul = Jīva = Śeṣa = Saṅkarṣaṇa = Kṣetrajña Sanatkumāra = Mind = Pradyumna the Creator = Aniruddha = Īśāna = Īśvara = Ahaṅkāra. am known as Puruṣa without acts am the th. Hiraṇyagarbha, etc are in me. Nārāyaṇas boons to Brahmán in days of yore. am Kapila, etc. . Brahmán springs from Aniruddhas navel. The feats that Nārāyaṇa will perform in the Tretā age shall take birth as Rāma of Bhṛgus race... in the twilight between Tretā and Dvāpara shall take birth as Rāma Dāśarathi at that time Ekata and Dvita will have to take birth as apes all those apes shall become my allies... in the period joining the Dvāpara and the Kali shall take birth in Mathurā in order to slay Kaṃsa, and take up my residence in Kuśasthalī Dvārakā shall transplant Prāgjyotiṣa to Dvārakā, and subjugate Maheśvara and Mahāsena, who will help Dā. Bāṇa ...Brahmán himself never obtained a sight of me in this shape of mine, which thou hast seen to day. Hari then disappeared Nārada returned to Badarī, to behold Nara and Nārāyaṇa. This great Upaniṣad, consistent with the four Vedas and with Sāṅkhya Yoga, and called Pāñcarātra, and recited by Nārāyaṇa himself, was repeated by Nārada in the abode of Brahmán. Yudhiṣṭhira asked Was not Brahmán acquainted with this wonderful narrative of the glory of Nārāyaṇa Bhīṣma said that it was only to Ṛ. in the abode of Brahmán that Nārada recited his narrative. The propagation of the narrative Ṛ. Sūrya, Ṛ. in Sūryas train, etc . on Meru Asita the Pitṛs heard it from my father Śāntanu it is a Purāṇa, and should not be communicated to anyone that is not a worshipper of Vāsudeva it is really the essence of the hundreds of other narratives thou hast heard from me in days of yore, . and As uniting together, churned the ocean for the amṛta after the same manner, the brahmans in days of yore, uniting together, churned all the scriptures and raised this narrative. He who reads this becomes an inhabitant of Śvetadvīpa, etc. Vaiśampāyana said Yudhiṣṭhira and all his brothers became devoted to Nārāyaṇa Vyāsa visited the ocean of milk, and worshipping the great God there, he came back to his own hermitage. Bhīṣma said have now repeated the narrative that was recited to Nārada that narrative has descended from person to person from very ancient times heard it from my father. Sūta said have now told you all that Vaiśampāyana recited to Janamejaya. King Janamejaya properly discharged all his duties according to the scriptures. You have all undergone severe penances, etc. residing in this sacred Naimiṣa forest, ye are...conversant with the Vedas, ...ye have come to this sacrifice of Śaunaka ye all ae ...Nārāyaṇa. heard this excellent narrative, that has descended from generation to generation, from my father in former times . Śaunaka asked about pravṛtti and nivṛtti, etc. Sauti recited the discourse of Vaiśampāyana to Janamejaya. Janamejaya said that the whole world with Brahmán, As and men are deeply attached to acts Brahmán, etc have ated the religion of pravṛtti. Vaiśampāyana said that this question related to a deep mystery, and that it required penances and acquaintance with the Purāṇas he recited what M. ṛ. Vyāsa said to his disciples Sumantu, etc on Meru Nārāyaṇa had been gratified by his penances on the shore of the ocean of milk, and he had, with the eye of knowledge, beheld all that occurred in the beginning of the Kalpa Mahā Puruṣa or Paramātmā Avyakta Aniruddha Pitāmaha from Ahaṅkāra have sprung the five elements Marīci, etc are the eight Prakṛtis, upon whom all the worlds depend Brahmán created them with the Vedas, Vedāṅgas, etc. Rudra ten Rudras these eleven Rudras = Vikārapuruṣāḥ...Brahmán with the R Prakṛtis, and . ṛ. repaired to the northern shore of the ocean of milk and practised the penances named mahāniyama for, celestial years then Hari spoke to them, saying that he would invest them with pravṛtti. They performed a sacrifice in honour of Viṣṇu according to the ordinances laid n for the Kṛta age. The great god was pleased and said that their pravṛtti should be fraught with ends whence there will be return Marīci, etc the seven Ṛ. who are mānasāḥ will become the preceptors of the Vedas, wedded to the religion of pravṛtti, and created for procreating offspring ...Sana, etc these seven Ṛ. who are spiritual sons of Brahmán, and whose knowledge comes to them of itself, are wedded to the religion of nivṛtti, conversant with Yoga and Sāṅkhya, and cause the religion of nivṛtti to flow in the worlds. Kṣetrajña is myself...Brahmáns son Rudra has sprung from his brow at his command...In the Kṛta yuga living creatures should not be slain in the sacrifices in the Tretā yuga animals, dedicated with mantras, will be slain in the sacrifices then comes the mixed yuga Dvāpara then Tiṣya with Kali in the van. Vyāsa continued . and Ṛ. went away. Only Brahmán remained, desirous of beholding the great god, then residing in the form of Amruddha the god then showed himself to Brahmán with a vast equine head, etc saying that at times he would appear in incarnate forms. Then he disappeared, and Brahmán proceeded to his own region. Do you bow to him who is the lord of the Rudras, etc. . Blessing upon the reader . Janamejaya inquired of the meaning of the different names of Nārāyaṇa Vaiśampāyana related what Keśava had said to Phālguna, when the latter asked him about the signification of his names mentioned by M. ṛ. in the Vedas and the Purāṇas. Kṛṣṇa said In the Ṛgveda, etc many are the names that have been mentioned by M. ṛ. from Nārāyaṇas grace has arisen Brahmán, and from his wrath has arisen Rudra description of Rudra aed in days of yore the ancient Rudra for obtaining the boon of a son Brahmán, etc ae Hari Nārāyaṇa . Etymology of Nārāyaṇa, etc. Ṛ Trita, the eldest son of Brahmán, when thrown into a well by Ekata and Dvita, invoked me as Pṛśnigarbha and was rescued from the pit Dīrghatamas invoked me as Keśava, became cured of his blindness, and then came to be called Gotama Agni and Soma, blending together, became transfused in one and the same substance .. in the Purāṇa this is said, and further that the gods have Agni for their mouth . Asked by Arjuna about the unity of nature of Agni and Soma, Kṛṣṇa related this ancient story quotation of the śruticalled tamasthe kṣatrabráhman, i.e. the brahmansquotation of the śruti relating to Agniquotation from Śatapatha brāhmaṇaquoting Sanatkumāra
Nariṣyanta or Nariṣyat, son of Manu Vaivasvata.
Nārītīrthāni, pl name of five tīrthas .
Narmadā, a river, the present Nerbudda . b . w By bathing in Narmadā and in the tīrtha Śūrpāraka, observing a fast during a fortnight, one becomes born as a prince, .
Nartaka1, name of a weapon .
Narataka2 = Śiva .
Nartanaśīla = Śiva .
Nāsatya, name of one of the two Aśvins . b, .
Nāsatya, dual = Aśvin, dual, .
Nāsatya, adj. . b, e janmani ...Brahmaṇaḥ
nāstika, mostly pl .
nāstikya, .
Nāṭakeya, pl a people .
Naubandhana .
Naukarṇī, a matṛ. u, .
Navacakrāṅga = Śiva .
Navarāṣṭra, name of a country .
Navarāṣṭra, pl a people .
Navatantu, son of Viśvāmitra. b
Nāvyāśrama, name of a place .
Naya = Viṣṇu .
Netṛ = Skanda, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Neya = Viṣṇu .
Nibiḍa, v. Niviḍa.
Nicandra, an Asura .
Nicita, a river .
Nīśā, wife of the fire Bhānu .
Niśā = Upaśruti, .
Niśācara, pl. = Rākṣasa, pl .
Niśācara, sg .
Niśācara = Śiva .
Niśācarapati = Śiva, .
Niśācarendra = Rāvaṇa, .
Niśācarī, .
Niśācarin = Śiva .
Niśākara1 = Soma q.v.
Niśākara2, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa.
Niśākara3 = Śiva .
Niśālaya = Śiva .
Niśaṭha1, a Vṛṣṇi prince .
Niśaṭha2, an ancient king .
Niścirā, v. Nirvīra.
Niścitā, a river .
Niścyavana, a fire. .
nidhi, pl .
Nidhi1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Nidhipa = Kubera, .
nidhipāla, pl .
Nidrātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Nigraha1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Nihantṛ, Nija = Śiva .
Nikharvaṭa, a Rākṣasa .
Nikumbha1, name of several Asuras .
Nikumbha2, a Kuru warrior .
Nikumbha3, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Nīla1, a serpent.
Nīla2, king of Māhiṣmatī . b, . Nīlarājan.
Nīla3, a mountain . g, . i, . g, . Nīlaparvata.
Nīla4, a monkey .
Nīla5, a Pāṇḍava warrior . Nīla2.
Nīla5, a Kuru warrior .
Nīla7 = Śiva .
Nīlā, a river .
Nīlaśikhaṇḍa = Śiva, .
Nīlagrīva, Nīlakaṇṭha, Nīlalohita = Śiva, q.v.
Nīlamauli = Śiva .
Nīlaparvata, a mountain. f, . Nīla2.
Nīlarājan = Nīla2, .
Nīlavāsas = Balarāma, .
Nilaya = Śiva .
Nīlāyudha, pl a people .
Nīlī, wife of Ajamīḍha .
Nīlikā, a river .
Nimeṣa1, a Nāga, accord. to Nīl a Yakṣa .
Nimeṣa2, Nimeṣāḥ, Nimeṣonmeṣa karman = Śiva .
Nimi1, an ancient king of the Videhas . Vaideha.
Nimi2, son of Dattātreya and father of Śrīmat .
Nimiṣa1, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Nimiṣa = Viṣṇu .
Nimitta, Nimittastha = Śiva .
Nimnagāsuta = Bhīṣma, .
Nīpa, pl a tribe or family .
Nipātin, Nīraja = Śiva .
Nirāmarda, an ancient king .
Nirāmaya1, an ancient king .
Nirāmaya3 = Śiva .
Niramitra1, son of Nakula .
Niramitra2, a Trigarta prince .
Niravagraha = Śiva .
Niravinda, a sacred mountain. s, .
Niraya, .
Nirghaṇṭaka, v. Naighaṇṭuka
Nirguṇa1 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Nirjīva = Śiva .
Nirmāṇarata, pl a class of gods .
Nirmocana, name of a city . c, .
Nirṛti1, a Rudra .
Nirṛti2, a goddess .
Niruddha, error in C. instead of Aniruddha, q.v.
nirukta, .
Niruktaga = Brahmán, .
nirvāṇa, .
Nirvāṇa = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Nirvīra, a tīrtha .
Nirvīrāsaṅgama, a tīrtha .
Niryāṇa .
Niṣada, v. Niṣadha2.
Niṣāda, pl name of low caste tribes . e The N. are wicked tribes who reside in hills and forests, . b, .
Niṣāda1, sg. . Do. = Ekalavva, .
Niṣādādhipati . Do. = Hiraṇ yadhanus, .
niṣadaḥ, .
Niṣādaja = Ekalavya, .
Niṣādarāja1 = Hiraṇyadhanus, .
Niṣādarāja2 = Ekalavya, .
Niṣādarājan = the son of Ekalavya, .
Niṣadha1, son of the elder Janamejaya .
Niṣadha2, an ancient king .
Niṣadha3, a mountain . d, . i, .
Niṣadha, pl a people and country Nalaḥ...Nānāṃ janādhipaḥānām adhipatiṃ NalaṃNalaṃ Nānām adhipatiṃJambūkh.among the peoples of Bhāratavarṣa
Niṣādī . a
Niṣaṅgin, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Niṣaṭha, v. Niśaṭha.
Niṣkampa = Śiva .
Niṣkriya = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Niṣkṛti, name of a fire .
Niṣkuṭa, a mountain .
Niṣkuṭikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Niṣṭhā = Viṣṇu .
Niṣṭhānaka, a serpent .
Niṣṭhurika, a serpent .
Nisunda, an Asura. b, .
Nitambhū, a ṛṣi .
Nītha, a Vṛṣṇi .
Nīti1 v. .
Nīti2 = Śiva .
nītiśāstra, .
Nitya, Nityanarta = Śiva .
Nīvārā, a river .
Nivātakavaca, pl a tribe of Asuras . d, . d, . g, .
Nivātakavacāntaka = Arjuna, .
One when the Pārthas were thinking of Arjuna, they saw Indras chariot, driven by Mātali, illuminating the sky, and Arjuna descended and saluted each of them Mātali also greeted and instructed them, and then returned in the chariot to Indra. Arjuna then gave to Draupadī precious gems, etc presented to him by Indra. Then he related all as it had happened, and slept that night with the two sons of Mādrī . The next morning Indra visited them under the sound of musical instruments, etc and blessed Yudhiṣṭhira, and advised him to repair to Kāmyaka. Blessing upon the reader . When Indra had gone, Arjuna related his journey from Kāmyaka, etc. . Arjuna continued his narrative he passed the night after the meeting with the Kirāta at that place, and in the morning he saw again the same brahman, and in the evening he had the visit of the Lokapālas the weapons that Indra promised to teach him were those of Vāyu, Agni, the Vasus, Varuṇa, the Maruts, the Sādhya and Paitāmaha weapons, those of the Gandharvas, Uragas, and Rākṣasas, and all the Vaiṣṇava and Nairṛta weapons in the chariot of Indra, Mātali wondered that Arjuna was not jerked, though Indra always himself gets jerked at the first pull by the steeds when he had learnt the weapons, Indra said that now even the gods could not conquer him he had received knowledge of fifteen weapons with five modes of using them, viz. Prayoga, upasaṃhāra, āvṛtti, prāyaścitta, and pratighāta Indra asked him, as his fee, to slay the Nivātakavacas, who were thirty millions in number and dwelt in the ocean, and gave him the chariot, upon which he had vanquished Bali, Śambara, Bala, Vṛtra, Prahlāda, and Naraka, and millions of Daityas, and this diadem, and ornaments like his own, and the impenetrable mail, and fastened this durable string to the Gāṇḍīva, and the gods gave him the shell Devadatta, through which Indra had conquered the worlds . Arjuna continued When he came to the ocean, he saw at a short distance the Daitya city filled with Dānavas. Mātali drove the chariot with force, and the Dānavas shut the gates. Then Arjuna blew the Devadatta, and the Nivātakavacas appeared with iron javelins, maces, clubs, hatchets, sabres, discs, śataghnīs, bhuśuṇḍīs, and swords, and sounded dissonant musical instruments. The Devarṣis, the Dānavarṣis, the Brahmarṣis, and the Siddhas came to the battle . With arrows inspired with mantras relating to the Brahman weapon, then with the Mādhava weapon and the Gāṇḍīva Arjuna killed innumerable Nivātakavacas, and the, horses yoked at the chariot conducted by Mātali trampled upon them . Arjuna reduced a shower of crags to powder by the Mahendra weapon, then dried up showers of water by the weapon Viśoṣana, that he had acquired from Indra then he annihilated fire by the water weapon, and by the stone weapon he repeatedly resisted the wind. Then darkness enveloped the world the steeds turned away, Mātali fell off, and the golden lash fell from his hand as Mātali was stupefied, a terrible fear seized Arjuna Mātali said that he had conducted Indras chariot in the battle for the sake of nectar, and in the battles with Śambara, Vṛtra, Vairocani, etc but never had he lost his senses before. Arjuna comforted Mātali and repeatedly frustrated the magic of the enemy, and Mātali again conducted the chariot. Then on a sudden Arjuna did not see the Dānavas, who had become hidden by illusion . Arjuna then fought with invisible weapons. Then they withdrew the illusion and entered their city. The fallen and their weapons covered the ground so that the horses had to proceed in the sky. The Nivātakavacas remaining invisible, covered the welkin with crags others, entering into the earth, seized the legs of the horses and the wheels of the chariot. Arjuna became distressed, but being advised by Mātali, he applied the thunderbolt, inspiring the Gāṇḍīva with mantras, so that the arrows sent by the thunderbolt, becoming thunderbolts, penetrated the illusions and killed the Nivātakavacas. While the wives of Dānavas were bewailing and at last fled to their palaces, Arjuna and Mātali entered the city, that was superior to that of the gods . Mātali told him that this was originally the city of Indra, but the gods had been driven away from it by the Nivātakavacas, who had through austerities gratified Pitāmaha and obtained from him the boons, that they might reside here and be free from danger from the gods. When Indra applied to Svayambhū, he was told that he himself in another body should destroy them. As the gods were unable to slay them, Indra had given those weapons to Arjuna, so that he might destroy them, Then Arjuna and Mātali again went to the abode of the gods . While returning he beheld a celestial city, moving at will, with trees of gems, etc with four gates, etc and Mātali told him it was Hiraṇyapura, made by Brahmán himself for the great Asuras, the Paulomas, and Kālakañjas, as the Daiteyī Pulomā and the Mahāsurī Kālakā had by practising austerities for, celestial years obtained from Svayambhū that their offspring should suffer little misfortune, be incapable of being killed by gods, and obtain an aërial, etc city, invincible even by the gods, Maharṣis, Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Pannagas, Asuras, and Rākṣasas. Brahmán had destined that Arjuna, a mortal, should kill them. Therefore destroy them with the thunderbolt. A battle ensued the Asuras resorted to illusion the city now entered into the earth, and now it rose upwards, etc. Shot with the iron shafts of Arjuna the city fell n. Then they environed him in, chariots, etc. Arjuna applied to Rudra, and seeing a man with three heads, nine eyes, etc he applied the Raudra weapon to the Gāṇḍīva when it had been hurled, there appeared forms of deer, lions, tigers, Garuḍas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Asuras, Guhyakas, Nairṛtas, Yātudhānas, etc by thousands. The Dānavas, some of whom had three heads, some four tusks, etc were destroyed. Arjuna again worshipped Tripuraghna . Mātali rejoiced and praised Arjuna. The wives of the Dānavas came out of the city bewailing the slain. Mātali took Arjuna to the abode of Indra, and related in detail to Indra Arjunas achievement, and Indra with the Maruts praised him, and said that gods, Dānavas, Rākṣasas, Yakṣas, Asuras, Gandharvas, birds, and serpents should not be able to resist him in fight, etc. . Indra said that on the battlefield Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Kṛpa, Karṇa, Śakuni, etc should not amount to part of Arjuna. Then Indra gave him this golden garland, the shell Devadatta, etc. . Then Indra told him to depart, and thus after five years come to you on the summit of this lower range of Gandhamādana . Having promised that he should in the next morning show Yudhiṣṭhira all the celestial weapons, Arjuna passed that night there with all his brothers . The next morning, when Arjuna was about to show the celestial weapons to Yudhiṣṭhira, the earth trembled, etc. The Brahmarṣis, Siddhas, Maharṣis, Devarṣis, gods, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Gandharvas, etc Pitāmaha, the Lokāpālas, and Mahādeva with his gaṇas appeared Vāyu threw celestial garlands, sent by the gods, on Arjuna, the Gandharvas chanted ballads, and Apsarases danced and sent by the gods Nārada came and prevailed upon Arjuna not to use the celestial weapons without necessity, as they would destroy the three worlds. Then the gods, etc went whence they had come, and the Pāṇḍavas pleasantly dwelt in that same forest with Kṛṣṇā .
Nivedana = Śiva .
Niviḍa, a mountain in Krauñcadvīpa .
Nivṛttabhrama = Mahāpuruṣa .
Nivṛttarūpa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Nivṛttātman = Viṣṇu .
Nivṛtti = Śiva .
Niyama1 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Niyamāśrita = Śiva .
Niyamadhara = Mahāpuruṣa .
Niyamendriyavardhana = Śiva .
Niyantṛ = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Niyata1, name of a fire .
Niyata2 = Śiva .
Niyatāyus, a Kuru warrior .
Niyati, a goddess .
Nṛśaṃsa = Śiva, .
Nṛga, an ancient king . b, . kk, . b, .
nṛparṣi, pl .
Nṛsiṃha . d, . Narasiṃha, Nārasiṃha, adj.
Nṛtyapriya = Śiva .
Nṛtyapriyā, a mātṛ. u, .
nṛyajña, a kind of sacrifice, .
Nyagrodha1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣnu .
Nyagrodhākhya, a tīrtha .
Nyagrodharūpa = Śiva .
Nyāya, .
Nyāya = Viṣṇu .
Nyāyanirvapaṇa = Śiva, .
Oḍra, pl a people . Uḍra, pl.
Ogharakṣas. c, .
Ogharatha, son of Oghavat2. b, .
Oghavat1, a Kuru warrior .
Oghavat2, a king. b, .
Oghavatī, a river . i, . next.
Oghavatī, daughter of Oghavat2 and wife of Sudarśana. b, . prec.
Ojas = Viṣṇu .
Oṃkāra1 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Śiva .
Oṣadhī, pl. . bis, . Do. = Śiva .
Oṣadhīpati = Soma
Pacapaca = Śiva .
Pāśa = Śiva .
Pāśāśinī, v. Palāśinī.
Pāścimānūpaka . Cf .
Pāśin, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Pāśivāṭa, pl a people .
Paśu = Śiva, .
Paśu1, pl a people .
paśu2, pl . Do. = Śiva .
Paśubhartṛ = Śiva, .
Paśubhūmī, a country .
Paśūnāṃ pati = Śiva, .
Pāśupata, adj. . d, . b, . b, . g, .
Pāśupatāstra . the prec.
Paśupati = Śiva, q.v.
Paśusakha, name of a śūdra. b, .
pada, .
Pāda = Śiva .
Pada anuttama = Viṣṇu .
Pādāṅga = Kṛṣṇa, .
pādapa, pl .
Padāti, son of the elder Janamejaya .
Padma1, name of several serpents . b, .
Padma2, an ancient king .
Padma3, a treasure .
Padma4, a warrior of Skandar u, .
Padma, name of a vyūha, .
Padmā = Śrī, .
Padmagarbha1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Padmaja, adj. . b, janma saptamaṃ Brahmaṇaḥ
Padmajanman . b, . the prec.
Padmaketana, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Padmākṣa = Viṣṇu, .
Padmālaya = Brahmán, .
Padmalocana = Viṣṇu, .
Padmanābha1 = Viṣṇu, .
Padmaṇābha2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Sunābha.
Padmanābha3 = Padma1, .
Padmanābha4, Padmanālāgra = Śiva .
Padmanibhekṣaṇa = Viṣṇu .
Padmasambhava = Brahmán, q.v.
Padmasambhava, adj. . b, .
Padmasaras, name of a place .
Padmātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Padmāvatī = a mātṛ. u, .
Padmayoni = Brahmán, q.v.
Padmeśaya = Mahāpuruṣa .
Padmin = Viṣṇu .
Padmodbhava = Brahmán, q.v.
Pahlava, pl a people .
Pahnava, pl a people, .
Paiśāca, adj. . b, .. b, .
Paiśāca, pl a people . Piśāca, pl.
Paijavana, name of a śūdra .
Paila, a ṛṣi . b, . b, .
Pailagarga, a ṛṣi .
Paiṅga, a muni .
Paippalādi, a brahman. b, .
Paitāmaha, adj. . u, .
Paitāmaha = Manu, .
Paitra, adj .
Paitrya, adj .
Paitṛka, adj .
Pāka, an Asura .
Pākaśāsana = Indra, q.v.
Pākaśāsanadāyāda = Arjuna, .
Pākaśāsanandana = Arjuna, .
Pākaśāsani = Arjuna, .
Pākātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Pakṣa = Śiva .
Pakṣālikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Pakṣarūpa = Śiva .
Pakṣin, sg. and pl. = Śiva .
Pakṣirāj1 = Garuḍa, . Do. = Sampāti, .
Pakṣirāja1 = Garuḍa, . Do. = Surnc, .
Paktṛ, Pakvāmamāṃsalubdha, Pakvabhuj = Śiva
Pāla, a serpent .
Palāśa, pl a family .
Palāśinī, a river .
Palālā, one of the mothers of Śiśu .
Palita, name of a mouse. b, .
Pālitā, a mātṛ. u, .
Pallava, pl v. Pahlava, pl.
Palvalāni, pl. = Śiva .
Pāṃśurāṣṭra, a country .
Pāṃśurāṣṭra, pl a people .
Pāṃśurāṣṭrādhipa = Vasudāna, .
Pampā, name of a lake . m, .
Paṇa = Viṣṇu .
Panasa, a monkey chief .
Paṇavin = Śiva .
Pañcacūḍā, an Apsaras . Rambhā.
Pañcaśikha, a muni. b, . b, . Kāpileya.
. b Bhīṣma said The Mithilā king Janaka was always engaged in reflecting upon the courses of conduct that might lead to the attainment of Bráhman. One hundred preceptors always used to live in his palace. Given to the study of the Vedas, he was not very well satisfied with the speculations of his instructors on the character of the soul and their trines of extinction upon the dissolution of the body or of rebirth after death. Once the great ascetic Pañcaśikha Kāpileya came to Mithilā, having roamed over the earth. He seemed to have assumed the form of that great Ṛ. Prajāpati, whom the Sāṅkhyas call Kapila they say he was the first disciple of Āsuri long living. He was performing a mental sacrifice for, years . He was fully con versant with the Pañcarātra and the five sheaths that cover the soul, etc. He had approached one day a large concourse following the Sāṅkhya trine, and instructed them about the Unmanifest Āsuri had inquired of his preceptor and understood the distinction between the body and the soul, and had acquired celestial vision. For that assembly of Ṛ Āsuri made his exposition of Bráhman. Pañcaśikha became a disciple of Āsuri he lived on human milk he was accepted as a son by the brāhmaṇī Kapilā, the wife of Āsuri, and used to suck her breasts. This was said to me by the holy one . Janaka, abaning his preceptors, began to follow Kāpileya upon the religion of emanci pation which is explained in Sāṅkhya treatises. Some say that, when ignorance is destroyed by knowledge, the destruction of existence itself follows . The king became filled with wonder . Continuation of the discourse between Pañcaśikha and the king on the topic of existence and non existence after death. The Mithilā king, beholding his city burning in a conflagration, himself proclaimed, in this conflagration nothing of mine is burning. The king gave up his sorrows, etc. He who reads this discourse attains to emancipation .
Pañcagaṅga, pl name of a tīrtha .
Pañcāgni = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pañcajana1, an Asura .
Pañcajana2, v. Pañcanada.
Pāñcajanya1, the conch of Kṛṣṇa. b, .
Pāñcajanya2, name of a fire . . Tapas.
Pañcaka, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Pañcakālakartṛpati = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pañcakarpaṭa, pl a people .
Pañcāla, pl a people . Pāñcāla, pl.
Pañcāla, sg v. Pāñcāla, sg. . Do2. = Gālava, . Pāñcāla, sg. Do. = Śiva .
Pāñcāla, pl a people = Pañcāla, pl . b, ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, . o, . Pañcāla, pl Pāñcālya, pl Prabhadhraka, pl Somaka, pl Sṛñjaya, pl.
Pāñcāla, sg. = Dhṛṣtadyumna, .
Pāñcāla, sg. = Drupada, .
Pāñcāla, sg. = Satyajit, .
Pāñcāla, sg. = Gālava . b, . Pañcāla, sg.
Pāñcāladāyada1 = Śikhaṇḍin, . Do. = Dḥṛṣṭadyumna, .
Pāñcālaja = Yudhāmanyu, .
Pañcālaka = Drupada, .
Pāñcālaka = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Pāñcālaka, adj. .
Pāñcālakulanandana = Vīraketu, .
Pāñcālakulavardhana = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Pāñcālamukhya = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Pāñcālanagara = Kām pilya, .
Pāñcālanṛpa = Drupada, .
Pāñcālapati = Drupada, .
Pāñcālaputra1 = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Pāñcālaputra2 = Vīraketu, .
Pāñcālaputra, pl .
Pāñcālaputrī = Draupadī, .
Pañcālarāja = Drupada, . next.
Pāñcālarāja1 = Drupada, . the prec.
Pāñcālarāja2 = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Pañcālarājan = Drupada, .
Pāñcālarājan = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Pañcālasutā = Śikhaṇḍinī, .
Pāñcālatanaya = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Pāñcāleya = Śatānīka, .
Pāñcālī = Draupadī, .
Pāñcālya1 = Āruṇi, .
Pāñcālya2 = Brahmadatta, .
Pāñcālya3 = Śikhaṇḍin, .
Pāñcālya4 = Drupada, .
Pāñcālya5 = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Pāñcalya6 = Janamejaya, .
Pāñcālya7 = Mitravarman
Pāñcālya8 = Satyajit, .
Pāñcālya9 = Siṃhasena, .
Pāñcālya1 = Sudhanvan, .
Pāñcālya1 = Uttamaujas, .
Pāñcālya1 = Vīraketu, .
Pāñcālya1 = Vṛka, .
Pāñcālya1 = Vyāghradatta, .
Pāñcālya1 .
Pāñcālya1, a Pāñcāla prince .
Pāñcālya1, name of tīrtha .
Pāñcālya, dual = Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujas, . Do. = Candradeva and Daṇḍadhāra, .
Pāñcālya, pl a people = Pāñcāla, pl ʹ, .
Pāñcālyaputra = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Pañcamī, a river .
Pañcanābhi = Kṛṣṇa, .
Pañcanada . m, .
Pañcanada, adj. .
Pañcanada, pl a people . next.
Pāñcanada, pl a people = Pañcanada, pl .
Pāñcanada, adj. .
Pañcarātra, a literary work. b, . c, . b, .
Pañcarātrika = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pañcasrotas, name of a place . b, .
Pañcavaktra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Pañcavaṭī, a tīrtha .
Pañcavīrya, a Viśvadeva .
Pañcayajña = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pañcayakṣā, a tīrtha .
. Vyāsa said to Drupada In days of yore, when the gods were celebrating a great sacrifice in the forest of Naimiṣa, Yama, holding the office of śamitṛ, did not slay the creatures, so that their numbers increased very greatly. Soma, Śakra, Varuṇa, Kubera, the Sādhyas, the Rudras, the Vasus, the Aśvins, etc complained thereof to Prajāpati, who comforted them, saying that when the sacrifice was over Yama would again sweep away the inhabitants of the earth. The gods then returned to the place of the sacrifice, and saw a golden lotus carried along the Bhāgīrathī. Indra proceeded to the spot where the Gaṅgā issues, and saw a beautiful woman, whose tears were being transformed into golden lotuses. She led him to Mahādeva, who as a handsome youth was seated with a young lady on a throne on one of the peaks of the Himavat, playing dice. When Indra spoke haughtily of himself, Mahadeva caused Śrī to paralyse him and lead him into a hole, where four Indras of old were confined in order to be reborn in the world of men, there to slay a large number of men, and then to regain the region of Indra. Their fathers should be Dharma, Vāyu, Maghavat, and the Aśvins, Indra creating a person from himself to be the fifth among them. Their names were Viśvabhuj, Bhūtadhāman, Śibi, Śānti, and Tejasvin. The weeping woman was appointed to be their common wife in the world of men. Nārāyaṇa, to whom Īśāna and the five Indras repaired, approved of every thing. The five Indras were reborn as the Pāṇḍavas, and Śrī as Draupadī. A white hair of Nārāyaṇas became Bala deva, and a black Kṛṣṇa, after having entered the wombs of Devakī and Rohiṇī. Having related this to Drupada, Vyāsa granted him celestial sight, so that he beheld the Pāṇḍavas endued with their former bodies. Vyāsa then related to Drupada the story of the damsel whom Śaṅkara, i.e. Śiva, appointed to be in a future birth the wife of five husbands .
Pāṇḍara, a serpent .
Pāṇḍaravāsinī = Śrī, .
Pāṇḍava, pl the five sons of Pāṇḍu, viz. Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīmasena, and Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva, husbands of Draupadī sometimes, especially in books, the name seems to denote all the adherents of Yudhiṣṭhira, . Pāṇḍaveya, pl Pāṇḍu, pl Pāṇḍudāyada, pl Pāṇḍu kumāra, pl Pāṇḍunandana, pl Pāṇḍuputra, pl Pāṇḍusuta, pl Pāṇḍutanaya, pl. Pāṇḍava, dual = Nakula and Sahadeva, .
Pāṇḍava, sg. = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍava, sg. = Bhīmasena, .
Pāṇḍava, sg. = Janamejaya, .
Pāṇḍava, sg. = Nakula, .
Pāṇḍava, sg. Sahadeva, .
Pāṇḍava, sg. = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍava, adj camūṃsenāsainyaṃsenāṃcamūṃsenāṃsenāsenāṃcamūḥcamūṃsenāsenāṃsainyaṃsenāṃsenāmahācamūḥsainyaṃśriyaṃ
Pāṇḍavaśārdūla = Sahadeva, .
Pāṇḍavaśreṣṭha1 = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍavaśreṣṭha2 = Bhīmasena, .
Pāṇḍavaśreṣṭha3 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍavadāyāda = Abhimanyu, .
Pāṇḍavāgraja = Yudhiṣṭhira
Pāṇḍavāgrya1 = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍavāgrya2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍavamukhya1 = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍavamukhya2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍavānāṃ praveśa .
Pāṇḍavanandana1 = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍavanandana2 = Bhīmasena, .
Pāṇḍavanandana3 = Janamejaya, .
Pāṇḍavanandana4 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍavapraveśaparvan . Questioned by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related Having obtained boons from Dharma, Yudhiṣṭhira returned to the hermitage and restored to the brahman his araṇī and mantha. Then he asked Arjuna to select some spot where they might dwell undiscovered. Arjuna mentioned some countries surrounding the king of the Kurus . Yudhiṣṭhira chose the city of king Virāṭa, who was attached to the Pāṇḍavas. Yudhiṣṭhira would introduce himself as a brahman named Kaṅka, who was skilled in dice and had been the friend of Yudhiṣṭhira . Bhīmasena as a cook and wrestler named Vallava, who had served Yudhiṣṭhira Arjuna as a hermaphrodite, Bṛhannalā by name, who had served Kṛṣṇā as a waiting maid . Nakula as a keeper of horses, named Granthika, who had formerly been employed by Yudhiṣṭhira Sahadeva as a cowherd, named Tantripāla Kṛṣṇā would serve Sudeṣṇā as a sairindhrī, skilled in dressing hair, who had waited upon Kṛṣṇa . Yudhiṣṭhira said Let our priest, with our charioteers and cooks, repair to the abode of Drupaḍa and there maintain our agnihotra fires, and Indrasena, etc with the empty chariots proceed to Dvāravatī, and the maid servants go to the Pāñcālas, together with the charioteers and the cooks. Let all of them say that the Pāṇḍavas had left them at the Dvaitavana lake. Dhaumya advised the Pāṇḍavas as to how they should behave at court and performed the rites ordained in respect of departure, and then set out for the Pāñcālas, taking with him their sacred fires Indrasena, etc proceeded to the Yādavas . The Pāṇḍavas then proceeded in the direction of the southern bank of the river Kālindī and passed through the countries of the Yakṛllomas and the Śūrasenas, leaving behind on the right the country of the Pāñcālas and on the left that of the Daśārṇas. Arjuna carried Kṛṣṇā. When they had reached the capital of Virāṭa, Arjuna, as Gāṇḍīva was known to all men, caused them to stow away their weapons in a śamī tree near a cemetery. Nakula ascended the tree and tied the weapons fast. In the tree they hung up a corpse and said to the inquirers This is our mother, aged years. They kept for themselves the names Jaya, jayanta, Vijaya, Jayatsena, Jayadbala . Yudhiṣṭhira praised Durgā, who then showed herself to him and promised him victory, etc. . They then entered the city and were successively received by Virāṭa. Yudhiṣṭhira was accepted as a courtier . Bhīmasena was accepted as a cook and a wrestler . Kṛṣṇā was seen by the queen Sudeṣṇā Kaikeyī and accepted as a sairindhrī she said My five husbands, who are Gandharvas and sons of a Gandharva king, always protect me . Sahadeva came clad in a cowherds dress and speaking the dialect of cowherds, and said that he was a vaiśya named Ariṣṭanemi. He was accepted as the kings head cowherd . Then Arjuna appeared dressed as an eunuch and naming himself Bṛhannalā, and was accepted as a dancing master . Nakula, who named himself Granthika, like wise was accepted as the kings head horsekeeper .
Pāṇḍavarṣabha1 = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍavarṣabha2 = Bhīmasena, .
Pāṇḍavarṣabha3 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍavavīra = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍavayodha = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍaveya, pl. = Pāṇḍava, pl .
Pāṇḍaveya, sg. = Abhimanyu, .
Pāṇḍaveya, sg. = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍaveya, sg. = Bhīmasena, .
Pāṇḍaveya, sg. = Janamejaya, .
Pāṇḍaveya, sg. = Nakula, .
Pāṇḍaveya, sg. = Parikṣit, .
Pāṇḍaveya, sg. = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍaveya, adj .
Pāṇḍavīya, adj .
. When Gāndhārī had been with child a full year Kuntī invoked Dharma, who came seated on his chariot. She brought forth Yudhiṣṭhira . Similarly the birth of Bhīmasena and Arjuna are related in full Then Kuntī refused to have any more sons . Birth of Nakula and Sahadeva celestial voice. The ṛṣis on Śataśṛṅga gave the sons of Pāṇḍu names. They were born at intervals of one year from one another. They became great favourites of the ṛṣis and their wives, dwelling on Śataśrṅga . Kuntī refused to help Madrī to get more children, as she had been deceived by her having two sons at once .
Paṇḍita1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Paṇḍitaka.
Paṇḍita2 = Śiva .
Paṇḍitaka, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra = Paṇḍita .
Pāṇḍoḍrarājau, v. Pāṇḍyarāja.
Pāṇḍu, son of Vyāsa by Ambālikā, the wi of Vicitravīrya husband of Kuntī and Mādrī and father of the five Pāṇḍavas . P. then at the command of Dhṛtarāṣṭra offered his wealth to Bhīṣma, Satyavatī, Kausalyā, Vidura, etc and with the wealth acquired by him Dhṛtarāṣṭra performed horse sacrifices. With Kuntī and Mādrī he became a permanent inhabitant of the woods, addicted to hunting on the southern slope of the Himālaya, supplied with every object of pleasure and enjoyment at the command of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, . The muni Kindama inflicted a curse on P Agastya, . P. declared that he would lead the life of a brahmacārin according to the āraṇyaśāstras, and send his attendants to Hāstinapura to inform Bhīṣma, etc and with his wives, protected by mahābhūtas, Siddhas, and paramarṣis, he traversed the mountain of Nāgaśata, Caitraratha, Kālakūṭa, Himavat, Gandhamādana, Indradyumnasaras, and Haṃsakūṭa then he practised ascetic austerities on Śataśṛṅga, . P. became dear to the Siddhas, Cāraṇas, and ṛṣis, and like to a brahmarṣi. On the new moon day when the maharṣis assembled in order to partake of a great gathering of gods, ṛṣis, and pitṛs in the abode of Brahmán, P. wanted to accompany them with his wives from Śataśṛṅga to the north, but they told him that the princesses could not ascend the king of mountains, where they had seen the retreats of gods, Gandharvas, and Apsarases, and the gardens of Kubera, where only Vāyu and the Siddhas and the para marṣis could go. As he complained of being childless, they told him to let somebody else raise offspring for him. P.s conversation with Kuntī. P. quoted the words of Manu Svāyambhuva and the example of Śāradaṇḍāyanī, . Kuntī in reply alleged the Paurāṇic narrative of Vyuṣitāśva and entreated Pāṇḍu to beget children by his ascetic power, . P. said that women formerly were not bound to adhere faithfully to their husband, and were not regarded sinful when yielding to their desire that practice was applauded by the maharṣis, and even now prevailed among birds and beasts and among the Uttara Kurus. It was the muni Śvetaketu who established the now existing practice . P. further alleged the example of Madayantī and of Vyāsa, . Kuntī related to Pāṇḍu how she had obtained the mantra from Durvāsas P. told her to invoke Dharma, . P. died in accordance with the curse inflicted on him by Kindama . Kuntī wished to be burnt together with him, but this Mādrī did not allow, and herself ascended the funeral pyre, . The ascetics took Kuntī, the children, and the two corpses to Hāstinapura. Hearing of the arrival of thousands of Cāraṇas and munis, people soon after sunrise began to come out from the city to see, together with Bhīṣma, Somadatta, Bāhlika, the blind rājarṣi, the kṣattṛ Vidura, Satyavatī, Kausalyā, Gāndhārī, accompanied by the other ladies of the royal household, and the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. It was seventeen days after the death of P. . The ṛṣis, etc suddenly disappeared like a fata morgana, . Dhṛtarāṣṭra caused Vidura to celebrate the funeral ceremonies of P. and Mādrī on the bank of the Gaṅgā, . Bhārata, Bharatarṣabha, Bharatasattama, Kaurava, Kauravanandana, Kauravarṣabha, Kauravya, Kauravyadāyāda, Kausalyānanda vardhana, Kurūdvaha, Kurukulodvaha, Kurunandana, Kuru pati, Kurupravīra, Nāgapurādhipa, Nāgapurasiṃha.
Pāṇḍu2, son of the elder Janamejaya .
Pāṇḍu, pl. = Pāṇḍava, pl .
Pāṇḍudāyāda, pl. = Pāṇḍava, pl .
Pāṇḍudāyāda, sg. = Bhīmasena
. After some time Bhīṣma went to the capital of the Madra king Śalya, and according to the custom observed in that family and ordained by Svayambhū himself, he obtained his sister Mādrī for Pāṇḍu by giving great riches, and took her to Hāstinapura, where the nuptials were celebrated on an auspicious day and muhūrta. After thirty days Pāṇḍu started on his conquest of the world, and conquered the Daśārṇas, slew the Magadha king Dīrgha in Rājagṛha then going into Mithilā he defeated the Videhas then the Kāśis, Suhmas, and Puṇḍras, etc and after having made all kings the vassals of the Kurus, he returned laden with much wealth to Hāstinapura, where people said They who before robbed the Kurus of both territory and wealth, have been made to pay tribute by Pāṇḍu .
Pāṇḍukumāra, pl. = Pāṇḍava, pl .
Pāṇḍunandana1, pl. = Pāṇḍava, pl .
Pāṇḍunandana2 = Abhimanyu, .
Pāṇḍunandana3 = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍunandana, = Bhīmasena, .
Pāṇḍunandana5 = Nakula, .
Pāṇḍunandana6 = Sahadeva, .
Pāṇḍunandana7 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍunṛpātmaja, .
Pāṇḍupūrvaja, v. Pāṇḍu1.
Pāṇḍuputra, pl. = Pāṇḍava, pl .
Pāṇḍuputra2 = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍuputra3 = Bhīmasena, .
Pāṇḍuputra4 = Nakula, .
Pāṇḍuputra5 = Sahadeva, .
Pāṇḍuputra6 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍura, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
. Upon the birth of those three children, Kurujāṅgala, Kurukṣetra, and the Kurus grew in prosperity, etc. The southern Kurus, in virtuous rivalry with the northern Kurus, walked about in the company of gods, ṛṣis, and Cāraṇas. Virtuously ruled by Bhīṣma, the king was aned with hundreds of caityas and yūpas. Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Pāṇḍu, and Vidura were brought up by Bhīṣma as if they were his own children, and became well exercised in archery, etc and well read in the Itihāsas and Purāṇas and various sciences, and the Vedas and Vedāṅgas. Pāṇḍu excelled all men in archery, Dhṛtarāṣṭra in personal strength, Vidura in devotion to virtue. Hāstinapura was the foremost among cities. Because of Dhṛtarāṣṭras blindness and Viduras being a pārasava, Pāṇḍu became king. One day Bhīṣma addressed Vidura .
Pāṇḍurāṣṭra, pl v. Pāṃśurāṣṭra, pl.
Pāṇḍusaupāka, name of a caste .
Pāṇḍusūnu1 = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍusūnu2 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍusuta1, pl. = Iaṇḍava, pl .
Pāṇḍusuta2 = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍusuta3 = Bhīmasena, .
Pāṇḍusuta4 = Nakula, .
Pāṇḍusuta5 = Sahadeva, .
Pāṇḍusuta6 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍutanaya1, pl. = Pāṇḍava, pl .
Pāṇḍutanaya2 = Arjuna, .
Pāṇḍuvīra = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Pāṇḍya1, pl a people and their country .
Pāṇḍya2, two or more kings . c, . Pāṇḍyarāja, Pāṇḍyarāṣṭrādhipa.
Pāṇḍya3, the country of the Pāṇḍyas .
Pāṇḍya4, adj. .
Pāṇḍyarāja = Pāṇḍya2 .
Pāṇḍyarāṣṭrādhipa = Pāṇḍya2 .
Pāṇika, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Pāṇikarana = Śiva .
Pāṇikhāta, name of a tīrtha .
Pāṇikūrcan, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Pāṇimat, v. Aṇimat.
Pāṇītaka, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Paṅkadigdhāṅga, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Paṅkajit, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa, .
Pannaga1, pl .
Pannaga, sg . Names of single Pannagas Arbuda, . Śakravāpin, . Śeṣa, . Śrīvaha, . Kauravya, . Nahuṣa, . Padma, . Sumukha, . Takṣaka, . Vāsuki, .
Pannaganandinī = Ulūpī, .
Pannagapati = Padma1, .
Pannagarāja1 = Śeṣa, .
Pannagarāja2 = Vāsuki, .
Pannagarājan = Vāsuki, .
Pannagasutā = Ulūpī, .
Pannagātmajā = Ulūpī, .
Pannageśvara1 = Takṣaka, .
Pannageśvara2 = Vāsuki, .
Pannageśvarakanyā = Ulūpī, .
Pannagendra1 = Takṣaka, .
Pannagendra2 = Vāsuki, .
Pannagī, . Do. = Ulūpī, .
Pāpahan = Agni, q.v.
Pāpaharā, a river .
Pāpanāśana = Viṣṇu .
Para, an ancient king .
Para = Śiva .
Para = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Parā, a goddess .
Parā, a river .
Pārā, another name of the river Kauśikī .
Parāśara1, a ṛṣi, son of Śakti and Adṛśyantī, and father of Vyāsa . Then Adṛśyantī in the hermitage of Vasiṣṭha brought forth a son, Parāśara, who knew Vasiṣṭha as his father. Adṛśyantī, however, told him that his father had been devoured by a Rākṣasa. P. then in his anger resolved to destroy the whole creation, but was restrained by Vasiṣṭha, . b, . b, . b, . Śāktra, Śaktreḥ putraḥ, Śāktreya, Śaktrija, Śaktriputra.
Parāśara2, a serpent .
Parāśaraśarīraja = Vyāsa, .
Parāśarasuta = Vyāsa, .
Parāśarātmaja = Vyāsa, .
Pārāśarya1 = Vyāsa, .
Pārāśarya, one or two ṛṣis of Parāśaras race .
Pāraśava, name of a caste, . pārasava.
Paraśu, an ancient king .
Rāma, v. Rāma1.
Paraśuvana, name of a hell .
Paraśvadhāyudha = Śiva .
Pārada, pl a people .
Parā gati = Śiva .
Parahan, an ancient king .
Parākrama, a Kuru warrior .
Parakrāthin, a Kuru warrior .
Paramahaṃsa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Paramakrodhin, a Viśvadeva .
Paramaṃ brahma = Śiva .
Paramaṃ haviḥ = Agni, . Do. = Skanda, .
Paramaṃ padaṃ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Paramaṃ pavitraṃ = Skanda, .
Paramaṃ tapaḥ = Śiva .
Paramaspaṣṭa = Viṣṇu .
Paramatigmāṃśu = Sūrya, .
Paramātman
Parameśvara
Paramayajñika = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pārameṣṭha = Nārada, .
Parameṣṭhija = Nārada, .
Parameṣṭhin1 = Brahmán, .
Parameṣṭhin2 = Śiva, .
Parameṣṭhin3 = Viṣṇu, .
Parameṣṭhin4 = Nārada, .
Parameṣṭhin5, son of Ajamīḍha .
Parameṣṭhiputra = Nārada, .
Pārameṣṭhya, adj. . Pāra meṣṭha.
Paramo mantraḥ = Śiva .
Parānta, pl a people .
Pararddhi = Viṣṇu .
pārasava, said of Vidura, . pāraśava.
Pārasavī, said of the wife of Vidura, the daughter of king Devaka, .
Pārasika, pl a people .
Parasvāmin = Mahāpuruṣa .
Parataṅgana, pl a people .
Parāvaha, name of a wind. n The wind which takes away the lives of the creatures, whose track is followed by Mṛtyu and Vaivasvata, which leads yogins to immortality, by whose aid the ten thousand sons of Dakṣa attained to the ends of the universe, by whose touch one becomes emancipated and never returns, that wind is called by the name of P .
Parāvara = Skanda, .
Parāvarajña = Skanda, .
Parāvasu, a brahman, son of Raibhya and brother of Arvāvasu . b, . c, .
Pārāvata, a serpent .
Parāyaṇa = Sūrya, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Pārśvada = pāriṣada, .
Pāribarha, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Pāribhadraka, pl a people .
Pariśeṣa, .
Pariśruta, name of two warriors of Skanda. u, .
Paridhīpatikhecara = Śiva .
Paridvīpa, v. Sariddvīpa.
Parigha1, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Parigha2, name of a caṇḍāla. b, .
Parigraha = Viṣṇu .
Pārijāta1, a serpent .
Pārijāta2, a ṛṣi .
Pārijāta3, pl . Do .
Pārijātaka, a muni .
Parikṣit or Parīkṣit, son of Abhimanyu and Uttarā, and father of Janamejaya . One day king P the son of Abhimanyu, when hunting, having pierced a deer lost sight of it. He then asked the muni Śamīka, but received no answer as the muni was then observing the vow of silence in anger the king then placed upon the munis shoulder a dead snake and returned to his capital Hāstinapura. Of this the munis son Śṛṅgin was informed in a quarrel by his companion Kṛśa, and then cursed P saying that within seven nights he should be stung to death by Takṣaka. The muni was not pleased with the curse, as P. properly protected his subjects . Therefore he sent his disciple Gauramukha to inform P who became very repentant and sorrowful. A mansion was erected upon a solitary column and well guarded. The seventh day the brahman Kāśyapa was coming desirous of curing the king. Takṣaka in the shape of an old brahman met with Kāśyapa . As Kāśyapa revived a banyan which had been reduced to ashes by being bitten by Takṣaka, Takṣaka gave to Kāśyapa more wealth than what he expected from P and having ascertained by means of yoga that P.s span of life was at an end, Kāśyapa retired. Takṣaka went to Hāstinapura, and hearing that P. was protected by poison neutralizing mantras and medicines, he caused some serpents in the guise of ascetics to present the king with kuśa grass, water, and fruits, in one of which he himself was concealed as a tiny ugly insect. As such he appeared when P. was eating the fruit. P. said The sun is setting, to day have no more fear from poison therefore let this insect becoming Takṣaka bite me so that the words of the ascetic may be rendered true. Then he placed the insect on his neck and was bitten by Takṣaka, who coiled round his neck and uttered a tremens roar, . The ministers of Janamejaya told him about P that he was virtuous, a pupil of Śāradvata in the science of arms and dear to Govinda, and that he had got his name because he was born by Uttarā, parikṣīṇeṣu Kuruṣu, and that he ruled sixty years that being addicted to hunting he made over all affairs of state to his ministers then how he insulted Śamīka, and his death they also mentioned that Takṣaka had insulted the ṛṣi Uttaṅka, . Abhimanyoḥ sutaḥ, Abhimanyuja, Bharataśreṣṭha, Kirīṭitanayātmaja, Kuru śreṣṭha, Kurukulādhama, Kurunandana, Kururāja, Kuru vardhana, Pāṇḍaveya.
Parikṣit2 or Parīkṣit, son of Avikṣit .
Parikṣit3 or Parīkṣit, a king of Ayodhyā.
Parīkṣit, son of Anaśvan .
Pārīkṣit = Janamejaya1, .
Pārikṣita or Pārīkṣita = Janamejaya1, q.v.
Parinirmita = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pāripātra or Pāriyātra, a mountain . b, . g, .
Pāriplava, a tīrtha .
pāriṣada, mostly pl said of the followers of Śiva and Skanda, .
Pāriṣadapriya = Śiva, .
Parivaha, name of a wind. m The wind who bears the celestial waters and supports the celestial Gaṅgā, who causes the Sun with its thousand rays to appear as a luminous body of only one ray, and who causes the Moon to increase after his waning, that wind is named P.
Parivyādha, a ṛṣi .
Pāriyātra, v. Pāripātr.
Parijanya1, the god of rain = Indra, q.v.
Parjanya2, a Devagandharva .
Parjanya3 = Viṣṇu .
Pārjanya, adj. . next.
Pārjanyāstra .
Parṇacīrapaṭa = Śiva .
Parṇāśā, a river . b, .
Parṇaśālā, name of a village .
Parṇāda, name of one or more brahmans .
Pārṣada, v. parśvada.
Pārṣata1 = Drupada, .
Pārṣata2 = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, . Do. = Śikhaṇḍin, .
Pārṣata, pl the sons of Drupada .
Pārṣatātmaja = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Pārṣatī, the queen of Drupada . Pṛṣatī.
Pārṣatī = Draupadī, .
Pārṣṇikṣemasamūha, a Viśvadeva .
Pārtha1, pl. = Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīmasena, and Arjuna in some passages = the adherents of Yudhiṣṭhira, . Pṛthātmaja, pl Kaunteya, pl Kuntīputra, pl Kuntīsuta, pl.
Pārtha2 = Arjuna, .
Pārtha3 = Bhīmasena, = Arjuna, PCR. by errorVṛkodaraṃVṛkodaraḥ PārṣatayoḥVṛkodarātVṛkodaraḥ
Pārtha4 = Karṇa, .
Pārtha5 = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Parvaṇa, a Rākṣasa, .
Parvānukramaṇī, the first of the minor parvans of the Mhbhr. . Anukramaṇī.
Parvasaṅgraha, . Do. = Parvasaṅgrahaparvan .
the second of the minor parvans Parvasaṅgraha. Sauti related Rāma, having in the intervals between the Tretā and Dvāpara yugas repeatedly destroyed the warrior caste, formed five lakes of blood at Samantapañcaka, where he offered oblations of blood to the manes of his ancestors, until those pacified him, and his lakes became holy tīrthas . Sauti explained the term akṣauhiṇī and its subdivisions. Eighteen akṣauhiṇīs partook of the battle Bhīṣma holding the command for ten days, Droṇa for five, Karṇa for two, Śalya for half a the combat between Bhīma and Duryodhana lasting half a and the nightly assault of Drauṇi, Hārdikya, and Gautama on Yudhiṣṭhiras army taking place at the end of the same day. Sauti enumerated the smaller parvans, or greater chapters, together with the three parvans of Harivaṃśa . Sauti enumerated the eighteen books or greater parvans, with Harivaṃśa as the nineteenth, with a summary of their contents, a computation of the number of verses, and renewed praises .
Parvata1, a Devarṣi, son of Nāradas sister, often mentioned together with Gandharvas . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . next.
Parvata2, a Gandharva .
Pārvata, adj. .
Parvataja = Kulindaputra2, .
Parvatapati = Bhagadatta, .
Parvatarāja kanyā = Umā, .
Parvatarājan = Mandara, .
Parvatavāsin, pl a people .
Parvateśvara1 = Bṛhanta2, . Do. = Bhagadatta, .
Pārvateya, a king .
Pārvatī = Umā, q.v.
Pārvatīya1, pl a people .
Pārvatīya2, adj. .
Pārvatīya3, a prince .
Pārvatīya4 = Śakuni, .
Pārvatīya5 = Janamejaya9, .
Paryavasthita = Viṣṇu .
Paryaya = Śiva .
Pāṣāṇatīrtha, name of a vedi .
Paṭaccara, pl a people .
Paṭaccarahantṛ, name of a prince . next.
Paṭaccaranihantṛ, name of a prince . the prec.
Patagaśreṣṭha = Garuḍa, .
Patagapati = Garuḍa, .
Patagarāja = Garuḍa, .
Patageśvara = Garuḍa, .
Patagendra = Garuḍa, .
Patagottama = Garuḍa
Patākin, a Kuru warrior .
Pātāla, a region under the earth, the abode of the Asuras in the world of the Nāgas . b, . b, . bis, . c, . b, . b, .
Paṭalāvatī, a river .
Patana, a Rākṣasa .
Pataṅga1 = Sūrya, .
Pataṅga2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Pataṅgarāja = Garuḍa, .
Patatrivara = Garuḍa, .
Paṭavāsaka, a serpent .
Paṭhavāsaka, v. Paṭavāsaka.
Pathikṛt, name of a fire . Paṭhyase śrutibhiś caiva veaniṣadāṃ gaṇaiḥ = Śiva .
Pati = Śiva, .
Patatri, a Kuru warrior .
Pativratānāṃ lokā, .
. Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Mārkaṇḍeya related, on account of Kṛṣṇā The Madra king Aśvapati, the husband of Mālavī, was old and childless. After eighteen years of vows and offerings to Sāvitrī, Sāvitrī granted him a boon he asked for many sons, but was promised a daughter. She was called Sāvitrī. As nobody asked her in marriage, she was sent to look for a husband herself . She chose Satyavat, the son of the Śālva king Dyumatsena, who had been blinded and deprived of his king and lived as an ascetic in the forest. Satyavat equalled Rantideva Sāṅkrti, Śibi Auśīnara, Yayāti, etc but Nārada said Within a year of this day he will die then Nārada went to heaven . After her marriage Sāvitrī dressed in bark garments, etc. . She counted the days, and having ascertained that her husband would die on the fourth day following, she observed a trirātra vow on the fourth day all the ascetics uttered benedictions that she should never suffer wihood she would not eat before the sun set. She followed Satyavat as he, taking his axe, set out for the woods . He fell ill and slept with his head on her lap. Yama himself and not his emissary came with a noose in his hand and pulled out of the body of Satyavat a person of the size of a thumb, bound it in the noose and proceeded in a southern direction. Sāvitrī followed him and was granted five boons that her father in law should attain his eye sight and be strong that her father in law should regain his king and never fall off from his duties that her father should have sons that she and Satyavat should have sons begotten from both of us that Satyavat should be restored to life and live years. Yama untied the noose she went back to the corpse and placed his head on her lap. Satyavat regained his consciousness. He was anxious about his parents, and they returned to the hermitage . Meanwhile Dyumatsena had regained his sight, but was anxious at not finding Satyavat. He was comforted by the brahmans Suvarcas, Gautama, Bharadvāja, Dālbhya, Apastamba, and Dhaumya. A little while afterwards Satyavat and Sāvitrī reached the hermitage. Sāvitrī narrated every thing that had happened and was praised by the ṛṣis . Meanwhile the enemy of Dyumatsena had been slain by his minister, and Dyumatsena then again became king of the Śālvas. Sāvitrī after a long time gave birth to sons, and her father also got sons by Mālavī. So also Kṛṣṇā will rescue ye all. Yudhiṣṭhira and his brothers continued to live in the Kāmyaka forest .
Pativratāyā ākhyāna .
Pativratāyā māhātmya Sāvitryāḥ .
and . Questioned by Yudhiṣṭhira about the virtue of women, Mārkaṇḍeya, saying that the work of a mother is more difficult than that of a father, and that for women neither sacrifices nor śrāddhas nor fasts are of any efficacy, but that they can win heaven only by serving their husbands, related When the brahman Kauśika, who had studied the Vedas and the Upaniṣads, was reciting the Vedas under a tree, a female crane befouled his body, and looked upon with anger by Kauśika fell to the ground. Kauśika regretted his angry deed. When he had entered a village in order to procure alms, in a certain house the wife first served her husband, who came home tired and hungry, with food, etc and then began to conciliate the angry Kauśika, who blamed her for exalting her husband above the brahmans. She said that she was no she crane, that she knew that the ocean had been made brackish and undrinkable by the wrath of the brahmans, that the fire of their wrath had not to this day been extinguished in the forest of Daṇḍaka, but that she regarded her husband as her supreme god, and deserved forgiveness, that anger is a foe to men within themselves, and that the gods know him to be a brahman who has abaned anger and passion, etc. and who, though himself injured, never returns the injury, etc that virtue is difficult to understand, but must be based on truth the ancients have declared that virtue depends on śruti, but it is variously defined and subtle to be understood thou art cognisant of virtue and studiest the Vedas but think, however, that thou t not know what virtue really is a fowler in Mithilā will discourse to thee on virtue. Kauśika blessed her, and returned to his abode, reproaching himself . He set out for Mithilā, ruled over by Janaka, and found out the fowler, who was seated in a butchers yard, selling venison and buffalo meat to a large crowd of buyers but he at once went to Kauśika, and proving that he knew why he had come, he led him to his abode, where he honoured him duly, and explained to him that, notwithstanding his cruel trade, which he had inherited from his sires and grandsires, and which belonged to his caste by birth, he led a virtuous life, serving his superiors and old people, speaking truth, never envying others, giving to the best of his power, etc. In the king of Janaka there did not exist a single subject that did not follow the duties of his caste. He did not slay the boars and buffaloes himself, nor did he eat meat himself he fasted during the day and ate in the night even though the behaviour of his order be bad, a person may yet be himself of good behaviour so also a person may become virtuous, although he may by profession be a slayer of animals. It is the fault of the kings when the subjects decay, and monsters, dwarfs, etc are produced, but Janaka ruled justly. If one repents a wrong e by him, he is delivered from his sin . If a man seeks redemption after having committed a sin, he becomes purified of all his sins . It is temptation that constitutes the basis of sin. Then he gave some advice as to what is virtuous conduct . The fowler and the animals slain by him are driven by their karman in a former life. In days of yore, animals and, cows used to be killed every day in the kitchen of king Rantideva at the cāturmāsya animals are sacrificed the śruti says, The fires are fond of meat, and at the sacrifices animals are killed by the regenerate, and these animals are purged of sin, and by mantras go to heaven. Regarding animal food this rule has been laid n by munis Whoever partakes of animal food after having first offered it duly and respectfully to the gods and the Pitṛs, is not polluted by the act. The śruti says, Such a man is not one who partakes of animal food, and a brahman who has intercourse with his wife during her season is a brahma cārin. King Saudāsa, under the influence of a curse, ate human flesh. Agriculture is considered to be praiseworthy, though the plough destroys many creatures. Seeds of rice, etc are all living creatures. As to hunting and the cutting of trees and herbs, many creatures live in trees and fruits and water. The earth and the air are all swarming with living organisms, which are unconsciously destroyed by men from mere ignorance . When life is at stake and in the matter of marriage, it is justified to tell an untruth. Whichever conduces most to the good of all creatures is considered to be truth . The fowler discoursed upon the influence of karman upon metempsychosis and salvation . Questioned by Kauśika about the senses, the fowler discoursed about the sinful . The virtuous man discerns these evils by means of his spiritual insight . Then he shortly enumerated the elements of the brāhmī vidyā
Patrorṇa, pl a people .
Pattana, name of a city .
Pattanādhipati .
Patti, pl a people .
Paṭṭiśin = Śiva .
Paṭuśa, a Rākṣasa .
Paudanya, a city .
Paulastya1 = Kubera, .
Paulastya2 = Rāvaṇa, .
Paulastya3 = Vibhīṣaṇa, .
Paulastya4, pl. .
Paulastya5, adj. .
Paulastyatanaya = Rāvaṇa, .
Pauloma1, adj. = Paulomaparvan .
Pauloma2, a tīrtha .
Pauloma3, pl a tribe of Asuras . d, . d, . next.
Pauloman, pl. = Pauloma, pl .
the fourth of the minor parvans. Sautis conversation, in the forest of Naimiṣa, with the ṛṣis at the twelve years sacrifice of Śaunaka . Śaunakas lineage from Brahmán through Bhṛgu, Cyavana, Prcmati, Ruru, and Śunaka was related to him by Sauti. Pulomā. Pramad varā. From this time Ruru made a vow to destroy the serpents, and whenever he saw a serpent he always killed it. Sahasrapad directed Ruru to ascertain the facts about the serpent sacrifice of Janamejaya and the deliverance of the serpents by Āstīka Ruru, having come home, asked his father, who related all about the story
Paulomī = Śacī, q.v. .
Pauṇḍra1 .
Pauṇḍra2, the conch shell of Bhīmasena .
Pauṇḍra3, pl a people . Pauṇḍrika, pl Puṇḍra, pl.
Pauṇḍraka = Vasudeva3, . Pauṇḍra, Puṇḍrādhipa.
Pauṇḍramātsyaka, a king .
Pauṇḍrika, pl a people = Pauṇḍra, pl .
Paurāṇa, adj. .
Paurandara, adj. .
Paurāṇika, adj .
Paurava1, pl. . Pauravaka, pl.
Paurava2 = Bṛhatkṣattra3, . Paurava7.
Paurava3 = Śāntanu, .
Paurava4 = Duṣyanta, .
Paurava5 = Janamejaya1, .
Paurava6 = Saṃvaraṇa, .
Paurava7, one or more kings at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira . Paurava2, Pauraveśvara.
Paurava8, an ancient king of the Aṅgas . King P. also had died description of his horse sacrifices and his gifts to brahmans versed in śikṣā and akṣara, whom he diverted by actors and dancers and singers gāthās in praise of P. are sung by those who are acquainted with the history of the past, . Bṛhadratha7, Aṅga4.
Paurava9, adj. .
Pauravadāyāda = Vidūrathasuta, .
Pauravaka, pl a people = Paurava, pl .
Pauravanandana1 = Bharata, .
Pauravanandana2 = Śāntanu, .
Pauravanandana3 = Saṃvaraṇa, .
Pauravanandana4 = Vasu Uparicara, .
Pauraveśvara .
Paurika, a prince .
Paurukutsa = Trasadasyu, .
Paurūravasa, adj. .
Pauruṣa, adj. . c, . b, .
Pauṣa .
Pauṣṭī, wife of Pūru .
Pauṣya1, a kṣatriya .
Pauṣya2 = Pauṣya parvan .
Pauṣya3, adj. .
the third of the minor parvans of Mhbhr. When Janamejaya, the son of Parikṣit, with his brothers Śrutasena, Ugrasena, and Bhīmasena was attending his long sacrifice at Kurukṣetra, his brothers beat an offspring of Saramā. Saramā then cursed them, saying that evil should come upon them unexpectedly. Janamejaya then returned to Hāstinapura and began to search for a purohita who might neutralize the curse one day when hunting he obtained for this purpose Somaśravas, son of the ṛṣi Śruta śravas and a serpent Somaśravas would grant to any brahman whatever might be demanded of him. Janamejaya then conquered Takṣaśilā. About this time there was a ṛṣi named Āyoda Dhaumya, with three disciples, Upamanyu, Āruṇi Pāñcālya, and Veda. Upamanyu . Veda . Utaṅka .
Pāvaka1 = Agni, q.v.
Pāvaka2, pl a class of ṛṣis .
Pāvakāśani, v. Pākaśāsani.
Pāvakasuta = Sudar śana, .
Pāvakātmaja = Skanda, .
Pāvakātmajā = Draupadī, .
Pāvaki1 = Skanda, .
Pāvaki2 = Sudarśana, .
Pavana1 = Vāyū, q.v.
Pavana2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣnu .
Pāvana1, a tīrtha .
Pāvana2, a Viśvadeva .
Pāvana3 = Viṣṇu .
. b Bhīṣma said There was a lordly śālmali tree on the Himavat. One day Nārada praised it, saying that Pavana must be its friend and protector, since he spared it, though he eradicates the tallest and strongest trees . The śālmali said that the Wind was not its friend, but that it was stronger itself than the Wind. Nārada warned him, saying that the Wind was stronger than even Indra, etc. . Informed by Nārada, the Wind came and rebuked the śālmali tree, saying that he had spared it because Brahmán, while creating the world, had for a time rested under it. The śālmali laughed and challenged the Wind to show his power, which the Wind threatened to next day. When night came the śālmali reflected that all that it had said to Nārada was false, that it was in reality weaker than other trees, and inferior in might to the Wind but in intelligence no tree is my equal . The śālmali then caused all its branches to be cut off. The Wind smiled the śālmali felt great shame, and, remembering the words of Nārada, repented greatly of his folly.
. b Bhīṣma said The Haihaya king Arjuna Kārtavīrya, with, arms, became the lord of the whole of this world in Māhiṣmatī he gave large gifts to Dattātreya, who granted him four boons that he should have, arms in battle, but only two at home that he should subjugate the whole earth righteously, and sway her with vigilance and that whenever he might happen to go wrong, the righteous should set him right. A. now regarded himself as having no equal. A celestial voice said that the brahman is superior to the kṣatriya A. maintained that the brahmans take refuge with the kṣatriyas what the virgin Gāyatrī had said from the sky was not true . shall bring the skin clad brahmans under my subjection. At these words of A. the invisible goddess became agitated . Then Vāyu warned A addressing him from the air. Asked by A. what kind of earthly creature the brahman is, if he resembles the wind, water, fire, sun, or sky, Vāyu praised the brahmans above all, citing Kaśyapa, Aṅgiras, Gautama, Aurva, and Dattātreya even Agni and Brahmán are brahmans the large king of the Daṇḍakas was destroyed by a brahman the ocean, that was full of crystal water, cursed by the brahmans, became saline in taste. Arjuna remained silent . Vāyu repeated the story of Kaśyapa in detail, and asked Arjuna if he knew a kṣatriya superior to Kaśyapa. Arjuna remained silent. Then Vāyu related the story of Utathya . Arjuna remained silent. Vāyu then described the greatness of Agastya . Arjuna remained silent. Vāyu related a feat of Vasiṣṭhas . Arjuna remained silent. Vāyu related a feat of Atris . Arjuna remained silent. Vāyu related a feat of Cyavanas . Arjuna remained silent. Vāyu related the history of the Kapas . Arjuna praised the brahmans, mentioning Dattātreya. Vāyu told him always to protect them a terrible danger threatens thee from the Bhṛgus that will take place after a time .
Pavanasya hrada, a tīrtha .
Pavanātmaja1 = Bhīmasena, q.v. .
Pavanātmaja2 = Hanūmat, q.v.
Pavitra = Skanda, . Do. = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pavitrā, a river .
Pavitra = Śiva . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Pavitrapāṇi, a ṛṣi .
Payasya, son of Aṅgiras. b, .
Payodā, a mātṛ. u, .
Payonidhi = Śiva .
Payoṣṇī, a river . c The river P. was aned by the Vidarbha king, and its waters were mixed with soma juice, . b Here king Nṛga gratified Indra by offering soma. Here the gods with Indra and the Prajāpatis performed sacrifices. Here king Gaya Āmūrtarāyasa satisfied Indra with soma in seven horse sacrifices, where all the articles, which else are made of wood or earth, were of gold. Seven sets of these articles were prepared by him, and at the top of each sacrificial stake seven rings were fastened the gods themselves with Indra erected the sacrificial stakes. Indra became delighted with soma and the brahmans with the dakṣiṇās, which were innumerable as the sand grains, the stars, or the raindrops. Gaya presented the brahmans with golden cows made by Viśvakarman, so numerous were his caityas that but little space was left on the earth. Thus Gaya attained to the worlds of Indra he who bathes in the P. attains to the same, .
Peśala = Viṣṇu .
Phalakakṣa, a Yakṣa .
Phalakīvana, a tīrtha .
Phalgu, name of a tīrtha or of a river . Phalgutīrtha.
Phālguna1 = Arjuna, q.v.
Phālguna2 .
Phālgunātmaja = Abhimanyu, .
Phālguni1 = Abhimanyu, .
Phālguni2 = Irāvat, .
Phalgunī, sg dual, or pl name of two nakṣatras .
Phalgutīrtha, name of a tīrtha . Phalgu.
Phalodaka, a Yakṣa .
Phaṇīndra = Ananta, .
phenapa, subst. and adj .
Phenapācārya = Mahāpuruṣa .
Picchala, a serpent.
Picchalā, a river .
Piśāca, pl a class of beings, also name of a people . b, . d, in the palace of IndraVaiśravaṇasabhāv.worship Kubera in his palaceBrahmasabhāv.worship Brahmán in his palaceBrahmaśirasKairātap.Ditija Psūdanaṃ...GāṇḍīvaṃNalopākhyānap.oraga RākṣasānTīrthayātrāp.Bhūta Yakṣa Pāś ca, worship Śiva at GokarṇaNivātakavacayuddhap.Ājagarap.Skanpattion the mountain ŚvetaSkanākhyānaānāṃ gaṇaiḥ, surround SkandaManuṣyagrahak.v. Paiśāca2Skandayuddhaānāṃ asaṅkhyeyā gaṇāḥ.ānāṃ gaṇaiḥ, surround SkandaJayadrathavimokṣaṇap.oraga mānu ṣān, created by the maharṣisRāmopākhyānap.Rākṣasāḥ puruṣādāś ca Pāś ca, made Rāvaṇa their kingSītā Rāvaṇas.caturdaśa Pānāṃ kanyāḥ, wives of RāvaṇaRāma Rāvaṇayuddhagaṇān...P kṣudra Rakṣasāṃānāṃ, sc. balaiḥ, follow RāvaṇaBhagavadgītāp.Yakṣa Rakṣaḥ PebhyaḥBhīṣmavadhap.oraga Rākṣasāḥa people in the army of Yudhi ṣṭhiraoraga Rākṣasāḥ, praise ArjunaRākṣasāś ca Pāś cānye piśitāśanāḥ.a people in the army of DuryodhanaDroṇābhiṣekap.a people that had been vanquished by KṛṣṇaAbhi manyuvadhap.saṅghāḥdrink bloodPratijñāp.oraga RākṣasāḥJayadrathavadhap.nṛtyat preta Pādyair Bhūtākīrṇāṃ, sc. nadīṃniśācara śva vṛka Pmodanaṃ mahītalaṃ, i.e. the battle fieldGhaṭotkacavadhap.Siddha Gandharva Psaṅghāḥ, praised Aśvatthāmanoraga Rākṣasaiḥghoradarśanaiḥ, yoked to the chariot of Alambuṣayuktaṃ gajanibhair vāhaiḥ Pvadanaiḥ kharaiḥ, sc. the chariot of Ghaṭotkacaassisted GhaṭotkacaNārāyaṇāstramokṣap.NārāyaṇaNāga Rakṣaḥ PānKarṇap.Rakṣaḥ Pāś ca, on the battle fieldGaruḍa Psayakṣa Rākṣasān, vanquished by Arjuna in the Khāṇḍava forestRakṣaḥ Pāś ca, protect Himavativaoraga Rākṣasāḥ, present at the encounter between Karṇa and Arjunasided with KarṇaŚaṅkhatīrthain ŚaṅkhatīrthaĀdityatīrthain ĀdityatīrthaGadāyuddhāp.ānāṃ...antarīkṣe mahānadaḥSauptikap.Page5 b Rakṣāṃsi Pāś ca...khādanto naramāṃsāne pibantaḥ śoṇitāni caStrīvilāpap.Rājadh.Yakṣa Rakṣaḥ PānāṃMokṣadh.vatTulādhāra Jājalisaṃv.Mokṣadh.sg. = piśā copahata, Nīl.vatJvarotpattiDakṣa yajñavināśaoraga Rākṣasāḥoraga RākṣasaiḥDakṣaprokta Śivasahasra nāmastotraMokṣadh.sa Cāraṇa Pe, sc. trailokyeŚukā bhipatanaoraga RākṣasānĀnuśāsanik.Brahmādayaḥ Piśācāntāḥ... devāḥUpamanyuPreta PyoḥĀnuśāsanik.Suparṇa Gandharva P Dānavāḥoraga Rākṣasāḥ KinnarāṇāṃYātudhānāḥ Pāś ca lumpanti tad dhaviḥdakṣiṇāUmā Maheśvarasaṃv.on HimavatĀnuśāsanik.sg.Muñjavatworship Śiva on MuñjavatGuruśiṣyasaṃv.oraga Rakṣasāṃ...Īśvaraḥ prabhuḥāsura RākṣasāḥPutradarśanap.had been reborn as warriors of the great battle
Piśāca2, name of a Yakṣa .
Piśācaka, dual = Bahi and Hīka, .
Piśācī .
Piśaṅga, a serpent .
piśitāśa, pl. = Rākṣasa, pl .
Piśitāśana, sg. = Ghaṭotkaca, .
piśitāśin, pl. = Rākṣasa, pl .
Pināka, the staff or bow of Śiva . b, . g, . b, .
Pinākaśūlahasta = Kṛṣṇa, .
Pinākadhṛk, Pinākagoptṛ, Pinākapāṇi = Śiva, q.v.
Pinākin1, a Rudra .
Pinākin2 = Śiva, q.v.
Piṇḍāra, a serpent . next.
Piṇḍāraka1, a serpent .
Piṇḍāraka2, a Vṛṣṇi .
Piṇḍāraka3, a tīrtha . y, .
Piṇḍasektṛ, a serpent .
Piṅga = Śiva, .
Piṅgākṣī, names of two mātṛs. u, .
Piṅgala1, a serpent .
Piṅgala2, names of two brahmans .
Piṅgala3, a Yakṣa king .
Piṅgala4 = Śiva, .
Piṅgalā, a courtesan .
Piṅgalaka, a Yakṣa .
Piṅgatīrtha, a tīrtha .
Piṅgāyā āśrama, a tīrtha. y, .
Piṅgeśa = Agni, q.v.
Piñjalā, a river .
Piñjaraka, a serpent .
Pippalāda, a ṛṣi .
Pītakauśeyavāsas = Kṛṣṇa, .
Pitāmaha1 = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Pitāmaha2 = Brahmán, q.v. .
Pitāmaha3 = Śiva, .
pitāmaha, pl. = pitṛ, pl .
Pitāmahasaras, name of one or more tīrthas . next.
Pitāmahasya saras, name of one or more tīrthas . q, . the prec.
Pitāmahasuta1 = Atri, .
Pitāmahasuta2 = Sanatkumara, .
Pitā, mātā, pitāmaha = Sūrya, .
Pītātman = Śiva .
Pītavāsas = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Pītavāsinī = Durgā, .
Pīṭha, an Asura . b, .
Piṭhara, an Asura .
Piṭharaka, a serpent .
Pitṛ = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Pitṛ, pl .
Pitṛgraha, the Pitṛ demon .
Pitṛloka, .
Pitṛlokarṣi, pl .
Pitṝṇām āśrama, name of a tīrtha. q, .
Pitṛpati, Pitṛrāja, Pitṛrājan = Yama, q.v.
Pitṛrūpa, a Rudra .
Pitrya, adj .
Pitṛyāna, .
plakṣajāta, adj said of the river Sarasvatī, .
Plakṣā = Sarasvatī, .
Plakṣaprasravaṇa, name of a tīrtha .
plakṣarāja, .
Plakṣāvataraṇa, a tīrtha . d P. is situated on the Yamunā, and is the entrance to the region of heaven there the paramarṣis had performed sacrifices of the Sārasvata kind their king Bharata let loose the horse for his horse sacrifice there Marutta, assisted by the ṛṣi Saṃvarta, performed excellent sacrifices, .
Plakṣāvataraṇagamana . Lomaśa pointed out to Yudhi ṣṭhira the spots where sacrifices had been performed by Prajāpati, Ambarīṣa Nābhāga, the sārvabhauma Yayāti Nāhuṣa the r of Kurukṣetra the śamī tree, which had got only a single leaf the lakes of Paraśu Rāma the hermitage of Nārāyaṇa the path of Ṛcīkas son in the river Raupyā further, that a Piśāca woman with pestles for her ornaments had said Having eaten curd in Yugandhara, and lived in Acyutasthala, and bathed in Bhūtilaya, thou shouldst live with thy sons, etc. the tīrtha Plakṣāvataraṇa. Having taken his bath on this spot one becomes able to behold all the worlds and is purified from his evil deeds. The Pāṇḍavas having bathed, Yudhiṣṭhira beheld all the worlds and Arjuna . Dakṣa, when engaged in a sacrifice there, had blessed the spot, saying Those men that die on this spot shall win a place in heaven. Lomaśa pointed out to Yudhiṣṭhira the Sarasvatī, the Oghavatī, Vinaśana, Cama sodbheda, the tīrtha of Sindhu, Prabhāsa, Viṣṇupada, Vipāśā, Kāśmīramaṇḍala, the gate of Mānasa, a gap opened by Rāma in the midst of this mountain. Vātikakhaṇḍa, on the north of Videha, yonder lake, where people propitiate Śiva with sattras in the month of Caitra, and become free from sins, Ujjānaka, the lake Kuśavat with a lotus in the kuśa grass, and the hermitage of Rukmiṇī, Bhṛgutuṅga, Vitastā, the holy rivers Jalā and Upajalā, where Indra and Agni tested king Uśīnara .
Plakṣavatī, a river .
Plavaṅga = Agni, q.v.
Potaka, a serpent .
Potimatsaka, a king . Pauṇḍramātsyaka.
Potṛ = Śiva, .
Prabāhu, a Kuru warrior .
Prabālaka, v. Pravālaka.
Prabhā, a goddess .
Prabhā, an Apsaras. b, .
Prabhadraka, pl mostly said of a division of the Pāñcālas .
Prabhākara1 = Sūrya, .
Prabhākara2, name of a varṣa in Kuśadvīpa . Do see Prabhāraka.
Prabhañjana, a king . Do. = Vāyu, q.v.
Prabhañjanasuta = Bhīmasena, .
Prabhañjanasutānuja = Arjuna, .
Prabhāraka, a serpent .
Prabhāsa1, one of the Vasus .
Prabhāsa2, a tīrtha . b, . e P. is the favoured spot of Indra and removes all sins, . b, . b, tīrthaṃ, = Hiraṇyasaras, origin of the name, PuṣkaraCāṇḍālikāśramaŚapathavidhiin the westGolokaĀnuśāsanik.Anugītāp.near DvāravatīMausalap.there the Vṛṣṇis met with destruction
Prabhāsa3, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Prabhāsa4, pl a sort of ṛṣis .
Prabhāsatīrtha = Prabhāsa2, .
Prabhāsotpattikathana . Dakṣa had twenty seven daughters, married to Soma, connected with the several constellations serving to help men in calculating time, all beautiful Rohiṇī, however, was the foremost in beauty. As Soma lived long with Rohiṇī, his other wives complained to Dakṣa, who got them reconciled. As Soma, however, still continued to live with Rohiṇī exclusively, his other wives once more approached Dakṣa, who now threatened to curse him. His threats were not, however, heeded, and when the wives complained a third time, Dakṣa cursed Soma, so that he was affected with phthisis. His sacrifices, etc were in vain the herbs became tasteless and failed to grow, etc. The gods prevailed upon Dakṣa to withdraw the curse on condition that Soma should behave equally towards all his wives, and bathe in the tīrtha where the Sarasvatī mingles with the ocean, and ae Mahādeva there then he should during the one half of the month wane every day and during the other wax every day. Bathing there on the day of new moon, he was restored. Dakṣa told Soma not to disregard women and brahmans. Prabhāsa became the foremost of all tīrthas Soma bathes there on every recurring day of the new moon and regains his form and beauty thence comes its name Prabhāsa, because Soma there regained his effulgence .
Prabhātā .
Prabhava = Viṣṇu .
Prabhāva = Śiva .
Prabhavaḥ sarvabhūtānāṃ = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva, .
Prabhāvatī, name of a female ascetic .
Prabhāvatī, the wife of Sūrya .
Prabhāvatī, a mātṛ. u, .
Prabhāvatī, a princess. b, .
Prabhāvātman = Śiva .
Prabhu1, an ancient king .
Prabhu2, = Brahmán, .
Prabhu3 = Śiva .
Prabhu4 = Kubera, .
Prabhu5 = Skanda, .
Prabhu6 = Sūrya, .
Prabhu7 = Viṣṇu, .
Prabhuḥ prabhūnāṃ = Skanda, .
Prabhūta = Viṣṇu .
Pracaṇḍa = Skanda, .
Pracetas1, a ṛṣi or Prajāpati . u, . b, . Pracetas, pl. Prācetas1 .
Pracetas2 = Śiva, .
Pracetas3, pl. .
Prācetas1 .
Prācetas2, pl. = Pracetas, pl .
Prācetasa1 = Dakṣa, .
Prācetasa2 = Manu3, .
Prācinvat, an ancient king .
Prācīnabarhis, a Prajāpati . b, .
Prācīnagarbha1 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Prācīnagarbha2 = Apāntaratamas, .
Prācya, pl a people .
Praśamī, an Apsaras. b, .
Praśānta = Śiva, .
Praśāntātman = Sūrya, . Do. = Skanda, . Do. = Śiva .
Praśastā, a river .
Praśni, v. Pṛśni.
Pradakṣiṇāvartaśikha = Agni, .
Pradara, pl a people .
Pradātṛ, a Viśvadeva .
Prādhā, daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa .
Pradhāna, a rājarṣi. b, .
pradhāna = prakṛti, . Do. = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pradhānadhṛk = Śiva .
Pradhānapuruṣa = Śiva, .
Pradhānapuruṣeśvara = Viṣṇu .
Prādheya, pl a family of Devagandharvas ʹ, .
Pradveṣī, wife of Dīrghatamas .
Pradyota, a Yakṣa .
Pradyumna, son of Kṛṣṇa and Rukmiṇī . g, . b, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms Jānardani, . Kārṣṇi, q.v. Makaradhvaja, Makaraketumat, q.v. Raukmiṇeya, . Rukmiṇinandana, . Sātvatamukhya, Vṛṣṇipravīra, q.v.
Prādyumni = Aniruddha, .
Prāgdakṣiṇa = Śiva .
Praghasa, a Rākṣasa .
Praghasā, a mātṛ. u, .
Prāgjyotiṣa1, name of a city . b, . c, . b, .
Prāgjyotiṣa2 = Bhagadatta, .
Prāgjyotiṣādhipa1 = Bhagadatta, .
Prāgjyotiṣādhipa2 = Vajradatta, .
Prāgjyotiṣajyeṣṭha = Mahāpuruṣa .
Prāgjyotiṣapaṭi = Bhaga datta, .
Pragraha, Prāgvaṃśa = Viṣṇu .
Prahartṛ = Śiva .
Prahāsa1, a serpent .
Prahāsa2, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Prahasta, a Rākṣasa . Rākṣasa.
Prahlāda1, an Asura . Virocana, the son of the king of the Daityas P for the sake of obtaining a bride, quarrelled with Sudhanvan Āṅgirasa, and they mutually wagered their lives as to who was superior, and made P. the arbitrator between them. As P. was frightened, Sudhanvan threatened him saying that if he answered falsely or did not answer, Indra would split his head into pieces with his thunderbolt. P. then asked Kaśyapa what regions were obtainable by those who, upon being asked a question, answered it not or answered it falsely. Kaśyapa said that they cast, Vāruṇa pāśas upon themselves, each of which could not be loosened in less than a full year, etc. P. then declared Sudhanvan to be superior to Virocana, as Aṅgiras was to himself, and the mother of Sudhanvan to the mother of Virocana. Sudhanvan, because P. had spoken truth, granted that Virocana should live years, . b, . f P the son of Hiraṇyakaśipu, could not raise the dart of Skanda, but fell n in a swoon, . b, . Asurādhipa, Asurendra, Daiteya, Daitya, Daityapati, Daityendra, Dānava.
Prahlāda2, a Bāhlīka prince .
Prahlāda3, a serpent .
Prahlāda, pl a people .
Prahrāda, an Asura, = Prahlāda . b, . For synonyms v. Prahlāda.
Prāhrāda = Virocana, .
Prāhrādi1 = Vātāpi, . Do. = Viro cana, .
Prahuta = Śiva .
Prajābhāva = Viṣṇu .
Prajābīja = Śiva .
Prajādhyakṣa = Sūrya, .
Prajādvāra = Śiva .
Prajāgara1 .
Prajāgara2 = Viṣṇu .
Prajāgarā, an Apsaras .
. Dhṛtarāṣṭra, after Sañjaya had left him, requested Vidura to tell him what may be good for a person that is sleepless and burning. Vidura said that Yudhiṣṭhira was worthy of being the sovereign over the three worlds, while the qualities of Dhṛtarāṣṭra were the very reverse of those Dhṛtarāṣṭra had no right to a share in the king owing to his being blind Vidura blamed him for having bestowed on Duryodhana, Śakuni, Karṇa, and Duḥśāsana the management of the empire. Then he explained the marks of a wise man and of a fool, quoting Bṛhaspatis answer to Indra, and alluding to the conversation between Sudhanvan and Asurendra in relation to the son of the latter . Continuation of Viduras discourse . Vidura said that as long as a mans good deeds are spoken of in this world, so long he is glorified in heaven, and cited the old story about the conversation between Virocana and Sudhanvan, both suitors for Keśinīs hand. Entrusting the cares of thy king to Duryodhana, Śakuni, the foolish Duḥśāsana, and to Karṇa, how canst thou hope for prosperity Possessed of every virtue, the Pāṇḍavas depend on thee as their father oh, confide thou in them as thy sons . Vidura related the old history of the discourse between Ātreya and the Sādhyas, who received instruction from Ātreya when he was wandering as a beggar . Then he explained what are those families that are called high . Vidura spoke of the seven and ten kinds of foolish men according to Manu Svāyam bhuva of the reasons why not all men attain the allotted period of life, etc. But Dhṛtarāṣṭra could not aban his son .
prajānām adhipa = Kṣupa, .
Prajānām īśvareśvara = Brahmán, .
Prajānāṃ patayaḥ = Prajāpati, pl . b, .
Prajānāṃ patiḥ = Brahmán, .
Prajānāṃ patiḥ = Śiva, .
Prajānāṃ patiḥ = Dakṣa, .
Prajānāṃ patiḥ, .
Prajānidhanakara = Mahāpuruṣa .
Prajāpati1, mostly identified or identifiable with Brahmán . b, . c, . c, . d, . d, . b, . kk, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, . d, . b, . b, . i, . b, . d, . b, . b, . g, . Prajānāṃ pati.
Prajāpati2, the father of the Vasus .
Prajāpati3 = Śiva, . Prajāpati1.
Prajāpati4 = Viṣṇu, . Prajāpati1.
Prajāpati5, said of different ṛṣis, etc. Agni, . Bharata, . Śaśabindu, . Śukra, . Dakṣa, . Prajānāṃ patiḥ. Havirdhāman, . Indra, . Kaśyapa, . Kapila, . Kardama, . Kṣupa, . Prajānām adhipa. Manu, . Pṛthu Vainya, . Soma, . Sviṣṭakṛt, . Tvaṣṭṛ, . Viśvakarman, . Vīraṇa, .
Prajāpati, pl. . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . Prajānāṃ patayaḥ.
Prajāpatimakhaghna = Śiva, .
Prajāpatipati = Viṣṇu, .
Prajāpatisuta = Bhṛgu, . Do pl. = Ekata, Dvita, and Trita, .
Prajāpatisutā, dual, = Kadrū and Vinatā, .
Prājāpatya, adj. . b, b, . b, . b, .
Prājāpatya, pl. . b, . b, .
Prājāpatyā lokā . l Gautama said Above heaven are the great P. l happy and free from sorrow, coveted by all, belonging to them from whom all the worlds have sprung. Dhṛtarāṣṭra said These regions are for the kings who are anointed after the rājasūya sacrifice, righteous protectors of their subjects, who have bathed after the horse sacrifice, .
Prājāpatyaka = Agni, .
Prajāsargakara = Mahāpuruṣa .
Prajeśvara1 = Brahmán, . Do. = Dakṣa, . Do. = Manu, . Do. = Yama, .
Prajñāstra, name of a celestial weapon .
Prakāśa1, a ṛṣi. b, .
Prakāśa2 = Śiva .
Prakāśakarman, Prakāśakartṛ, q.v. = Sūrya.
Prakāśana, Prakāśātman = Viṣṇu .
Prakālana, a serpent .
Prākśṛṅgavat, a ṛṣi. ii, . Gālavasambhava. Gālavi.
Prākkośala, pl v. Kosala, pl.
Prākkoṭaka, pl a people .
Prakṛṣṭāri = Śiva .
prakṛti, . Do. personif .
prakṛti, pl. .
Pralamba, an Asura .
Pralambahan = Balarāma, .
Pramadvarā, wife of Ruru . Menakā dropped her child by Viśvāvasu, P. near the hermitage of Sthūlakeśa, who took it up and reared it. P. was betrothed to Ruru, but a few days before the nuptials she was killed by a snake, . Svastyā treya, etc came to see her . Ruru retired into a deep wood and, weeping aloud, cried to the gods to resuscitate P. A devadūta told him to resign to her half of his own life, which he did. Then the king of the Gandharvas and the devadūta obtained from Dharma the favour that P. revived endued with a moiety of Rurus life then they were married and became happy, . b, .
Pramāṇa, name of a banyan tree .
Pramāṇa = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Pramāṇakoṭi, name of a place .
Pramardana = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pramataka, a ṛṣi .
Pramatha, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Pramatha, pl a kind of Rākṣasas, followers of Śiva .
Pramātha1, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Pramātha2, v. Pramāthin1.
Pramathanātha = Śiva .
Pramāthin1, a son of Dhṛtaraṣṭra .
Pramāthin2, a Rākṣasa, brother of Dūṣaṇa and Vajravega Dūṣaṇāvarajau Vajravega PauVajravega PauKumbhakarṇādivadhaDūṣaṇāvarajaṃ, slain by the monkey Nala
Pramāthin3, a Rākṣasa .
Pramāthinī, an Apsaras .
Pramati, a ṛṣi, father of Ruru . b, . Bhārgava.
Prāṃśu = Viṣṇu .
Pramlocā, an Apsaras .
Pramoda1, a serpent .
Pramoda2, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Pramodana = Viṣṇu .
Pramohanāstra, name of a weapon .
Pramuca, a ṛṣi . next.
Pramucu, a ṛṣi . the prec.
Prāṇa1 .
Prāṇa2, name of fires .
Prāṇa3, one of the five vital breaths . b, . c The wind or breath called Prāṇa residing within the head, and the heat that is there, cause all kinds of exertion. That Prāṇa is the living creature, the universal soul, the eternal Being, and the Mind, Intellect, and Consciousness of all living creatures, etc. Thus the living being is, in every respect, caused by Prāṇa to move about and exert...That heat, residing between Apāna and Prāṇa, in the region of the navel, operates, with the aid of those two breaths, in digesting all food that is taken by a living creature. There is a duct beginning from the mouth n to the anal canal. Its extremity is called the anus. From this main duct numerous subsidiary ones branch out in the bodies of all living creatures. In consequence of the rush of the several breaths those breaths mingle together. The heat is called Ūṣman. It is this heat that causes digestion...The breath called Prāṇa, the bearer of a current of heat, descends nwards to the extremity of the anal canal and thence is pushed upwards again. Coming back to its seat in the head it once more sends back the heat it bears. Below the navel is the region of digested matter, and above it that for the food not yet digested. The navel is the depositary of all the forces of life, which sustain the body. Urged by the ten kinds of breaths the ducts, branching out from the heart, convey the liquid juices that food yields upwards, nwards, and in transverse directions. The main duct leading from the mouth to the anus is the path by which yogins succeed in attaining to Bráhman by holding the soul within the brain. Even thus heat is planted in the breaths called Prāṇa and Apāna of all embodied creatures. That heat is always burning there like fire in any vessel, . b, . b, . g, . b, . g, .
Prāṇa4 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
prāṇa, pl .
Prāṇabhagna = Śiva .
Prāṇabhṛt, Prāṇada = Viṣṇu .
Prāṇadhāraṇa1 = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva .
Prāṇaghaṇṭa = Śiva .
Prāṇajīvaṇa, Prāṇanilaya = Viṣṇu .
Prāṇātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Praṇava = Viṣṇu cf .
Pranidhi, name of a fire .
Prānnadī, a tīrtha .
Prapitāmaha1 = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Prapitāmaha2 = Brahmán, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Prāpti1, wife of Śama .
Prāpti2, daughter of Jarāsandha and wife of Kaṃsa .
prāpti3 .
Praruja1, a Nāga .
Praruja2, a Rākṣasa .
Prasāda = Śiva .
Prāsānāṃ prabhavo vyayaḥ = Śiva .
Prasandhi, son of Manu. b, .
Prasaṅkhyāṇa, pl a class of ṛṣis. h, .
Prasanna = Śiva .
Prasannātman = Viṣṇu .
Prasena, son of Karṇa ʹ, .
Prasenajit, an ancient king .
Prāsenajitī = Suyajñā, the wife of Mahābhauma, .
Praskandana = Śiva .
Prasravaṇam Indrasya, a tīrtha .
Prasthala, pl a people, a clan of the Trigartas .
Prasthalādhipa = Suśarman, the Trigarta king, .
Prasthalādhipati = Suśarman, .
Prastuta, a Daitya .
Prasuhma, pl a people . Suhma, pl.
Prasvāpa, name of a weapon .
Pratāpa, a Sauvīra prince, one of the standard bearers of Jayadratha .
Pratāpana = Viṣṇu .
Prātara, a serpent.
Pratardana1, king of the Kāśis, son of Divodāsa . b, . b, . Divo dāsātmaja, Kāśipati.
Pratardana2, a Kuru warrior .
Pratardana3 = Viṣṇu .
Prathamatrisauparṇa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pratīcya, pl. .
Pratīcya, adj. .
Pratīcyā, the wife of Pulastya .
Pratiśravaṇa, a nakṣatra .
Pratiśravas, an ancient king .
Prathita = Viṣṇu .
Prathu = Viṣṇu .
Pratijñāparvan . In the evening, when Arjuna having slain large numbers of Saṃśaptakas, pro ceeded towards his tent, he said to Kṛṣṇa that his heart was affrighted he noticed indications of disaster Abhimanyu did not come out with smiles to receive him, etc. He remembered that Droṇa had this day formed the circular army, which none save Abhimanyu could break, but he had not taught him how to come out of it, after having pierced it he had heard the leonine shouts of the Dhārtarāṣṭras, and Kṛṣṇa had heard Yuyutsu censuring them for having slain a child instead of Arjuna, and then Yuyutsu had thrown away his weapons afflicted with rage and grief. Kṛṣṇa con soled Arjuna, referring to the kṣatriya duties and heaven. None save Kṛṣṇa and Yudhiṣṭhira could address Arjuna. Yudhiṣṭhira, addressing him, told him the particulars of Abhimanyus heroism and fall. Arjuna vowed to slay Jayadratha before the setting of the morrows sun even as to As men, birds, snakes, P wanderers of the night, B. ṛ . ṛ etc he said that they would not succeed in protecting him, even if he entered Rasātala, or ascended the firmament, or repaired to the city of the gods or the city of Diti if the sun set before he had slain him, he would himself ascend the pyre. Arjuna bent the Gāṇḍīva, Kṛṣṇa blew the Pāñcajanya, Arjuna the Devadatta . Having been informed by spies, Jayadratha was overwhelmed with sorrow and fear, thinking that not even Droṇa, etc not even G As U Rā can protect him against Arjuna he wished to return home. Duryodhana comforted him, saying that he, Karṇa, etc would protect him. Jayadratha, accompanied by Duryodhana, repaired that very night to Droṇa and questioned him about the difference between himself and Arjuna. Droṇa said they had got the same instruction, but Arjuna was superior to Jayadratha in consequence of yoga and the hard life led by Arjuna Droṇa would, however, protect him, forming an impenetrable array and, moreover, death ought not to be an object of terror to him . Kṛṣṇa remonstrated with Arjuna for his rash vow the Kurus had expected an attack by Arjuna now they will protect Jayadratha Karṇa, etc. would be in Jayadrathas van Droṇas army would be half a śakaṭa and half a lotus with a needle mouthed array in the middle . Arjuna assured Kṛṣṇa of his competence to accomplish his vow, notwithstanding Droṇa, Sā R A M with Indra, . P G Garuḍa, etc by the means of Gāṇḍīva and the weapons he had obtained from Yama, etc and the Brāhma weapon . The gods with Indra became very anxious. Sinister omens appeared in nature. Kṛṣṇa went to Arjunas abode and comforted Subhadrā . Subhadrā lamented over Abhimanyu, and said fie on Bhīmasena, etc because they had not protected him. Draupadī and Uttarā came to her, lamenting Kṛṣṇa said that Abhimanyu had obtained the most laudable and enviable goal. Then he returned to Arjuna . Arjuna performed his usual nightly sacrifice to Śiva. Kṛṣṇa with Dāruka repaired to his own tent. None in the Pāṇḍava camp slept that night, thinking of Arjuna. In the middle of the night Kṛṣṇa said to Dāruka that he had resolved to fight to morrow he should equip his chariot, placing on it Kaumodakī, etc making room for Garuḍa, and yoking thereto Balāhaka, etc. when hearing Pañcajanya emitting the shrill Ṛṣabha note, he should come to Kṛṣṇa . Arjuna in a dream saw Kṛṣṇa, who told him not to grieve, and mentioned the Pāśupata weapon if he remembered it now, he would be able to slay Jayadratha to morrow otherwise he should pray to Śiva. At the Brāhma hour, Arjuna saw himself sojourning through the sky Maṇimat, frequented by Si. and Cā etc. with Kṛṣṇa, to where Śiva was seated with Pārvatī Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna hymned Mahādeva . Arjuna saw that the offerings he had made every night to Kṛṣṇa had come to Śiva, and he mentally worshipped both Kṛṣṇa and Śiva. Śiva then told Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna where to fetch his bow and arrow from a lake of amṛta. In the lake they saw two terrible snakes when they had uttered the Brahma Śatarudriya, the snakes assumed the forms of a bow and arrow. From Śivas body there came out a brahmacārin of blue throat and red locks, and having showed Arjuna the use of the bow and arrow, and the mantras, he sped these weapons to that same lake. Having thus once more obtained the Pāśupata weapon, Arjuna with Kṛṣṇa came back to their own camp . THE FOUR TEENTH DAY. Yudhiṣṭhira underwent his morning rites Kṛṣṇa visited Yudhiṣṭhira . Then also Virāṭa, etc came . Yudhiṣṭhira asked Kṛṣṇa to rescue the Pāṇḍavas, quoting Nārada. Kṛṣṇa assured Yudhiṣṭhira of Arjunas success . Arjuna came and acquainted Yudhiṣṭhira of his dream. Then he and Kṛṣṇa and Yuyudhāna set out to Arjunas pavilion. Kṛṣṇa equipped Arjunas chariot, which Arjuna circumambulated, bow and arrows in hand. Arjuna, Yuyu dhāna, and Kṛṣṇa mounted the chariot. Many auspicious omens appeared. Arjuna charged Yuyudhāna to protect Yudhiṣṭhira in his absence . Yuyudhāna proceeded to Yudhiṣṭhira .
prātikāmin, . Sūta, Sūtaja, Sūtaputra.
Pratimāsya or Pratimatsya, pl a people . Potimatsaka.
Pratīpa, an ancient king . Kurunandana.
Prātīpa = Śāntanu, .
Prātīpeya1 = Śāntanu, .
Prātīpeya2 = Bālhīka, .
Prātīpeya .
Prātīpīya = Bālhīka, .
Pratirūpa, an Asura. b, .
Pratiskandha, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Pratiṣṭhā, a mātṛ. u, .
Pratiṣṭhāna, a city .
Pratiṣṭhita = Viṣṇu
Pratismṛti, name of a science .
Pratīta, a Viśvadeva .
Prativindhya1, son of Yudhiṣṭhira and Draupadī . Yaudhiṣṭhira, Yaudhiṣṭhiri.
Prativindhya2, one or more kings .
Prativindhya, pl. .
Pratyagraha, son of Vasu Uparicara .
Pratyakṣadharman = Yama, .
Pratyaṅga, an ancient king .
Pratyaya1 = Śiva . Do2 = Viṣṇu .
Pratyūṣa, name of one of the Vasus .
Prauṣṭhapada, name of a month .
Prauṣṭhapadā, v. Proṣṭhapadā.
Pravacanagata = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pravaha, name of a certain wind . h . The wind which urges masses of clouds born of smoke and heat, is the first of the winds and named P .
Pravāha, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Pravālaka, a Yakṣa .
Pravara = Śiva .
Pravarā, a river .
Pravara surāṇāṃ = Skanda, .
Prāvāra, a region on Krauñcadvīpa . next.
Prāvāraka = Prāvāra, .
Prāvārakarṇa, name of an old owl .
Pravasu, son of Īlina .
Praveṇī, a river .
Pravepana, a serpent .
Pravīra, son of Pūru .
Pravīra, pl a people .
Prāvṛṣeya, pl a people .
Pravṛttavedakriya = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pravṛtti = Śiva .
Prayāga, a tīrtha at the confluence of the Gaṅgā and the Yamunā . At P whose praise has been sung by ṛṣis, the gods dwell with Brahmán at their head, further the quarters with their presiding deities, the Lokapālas, the Sādhyas, the Pitṛs, the great ṛṣis Sanatkumāra, etc the stainless Brahmarṣis, Aṅgiras, etc the Nāgas, the Suparṇas, the Siddhas, the cakracaras, the rivers, the seas, the Gandharvas, the Apsarases, and Hari with Prajāpati. There are three fire caverns between which the Gaṅgā, that foremost of tīrthas, rolls rapidly. There the world purifying daughter of the Sun Yamunā unites with the Gaṅgā. The country between the Gaṅgā and the Yamunā is regarded as the mons Veneris of the Earth, and the ṛṣis regard P. as its genitals . P. with Pratiṣṭhāna, Kambala, and Aśvatara and the tīrtha Bhogavatī constitute the altar of Prajāpati. There the Vedas and the sacrifices in their embodied forms and the ṛṣis ae Prajāpati there the gods and rulers of territories perform their sacrifices therefore P. is the most sacred in the three worlds and the foremost of all tīrthas. By going thither, by praising it, etc one is cleansed from sin, etc and he who bathes there obtains the merit of a rājasūya and an aśvamedha. Let not the words of the Vedas nor the words of men dissuade thy mind from the desire of dying at P. There are, tīrthas at P. By only bathing there one acquires the merits of the four kinds of knowledge and of the truthful, . p, .
Prayāga, pl a people .
Prayatātman = Śiva .
Prayuta, a Devagandharva .
preta, pl . Pitṛ, pl.
Pretacārin = Śiva .
Pretādhipa = Yama, .
Pretaloka, .
Pretarāj = Yama, . next.
Pretarāja = Yama, .
Prītivardhana = Viṣṇu .
Priya1 = Skanda, . Do. = Śiva .
Priyā, wife of the fire Adbhuta .
Priyabhṛtya, an ancient king .
Priyadarśana, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Priyadattā = Pṛthivī, .
Priyaka, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Priyakṛt1 = Skanda, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Priyamālyānulepana, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Priyaṅkara, an ancient king .
Priyārha = Viṣṇu .
Proṣaka, pl a people .
Proṣṭha, pl a people .
Proṣṭhapadā, dual and pl name of a ble nakṣatra . Bhādrapadā.
Pṛśni, pl a class of ṛṣis .
Pṛśnigarbha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Pṛśnigarbhapravṛtta = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pṛṣadaśva, an ancient king .
Pṛṣaddhra, an ancient king . next.
Pṛṣadhra, one or more ancient kings . the prec.
Pṛṣadhru, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Pṛṣata, king of the Pāñcālas, father of DrupadaDrupadafriend of Bharadvājafather of DrupadaCaitrarathap.friend of Bharadvāja and father of Drupadasucceeded by Drupada
Pṛṣatātmaja = Drupada, .
Pṛṣatī = Pārṣatī, .
Pṛṣṭaja, a son or form of Skanda .
Pṛthā = Kuntī, .
Pṛthāśva, an ancient king .
Pṛthātmaja, pl. = Pārtha, pl .
Pṛthivī, . Pṛthvī.
Pṛthiviñjaya = Uttara, . Bhūmiñjaya.
Pṛthivīpati = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pṛthivītīrtha, a tīrtha .
Pṛthu1, name of a Vasu . Dhara.
Pṛthu2, a Vṛṣṇi .
Pṛthu3, a king of Ayodhyā .
Pṛthu4, = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Pṛthu Vainya, a mythical king . King Pṛthu Vaiṇya in his rājasūya was installed by M. ṛ. as emperor . During his time the earth yielded crops in sufficiency, etc. the kuśa blades were all of gold, etc. when king P. went to the sea, the waves became solid the very mountains used to open before him that he might pass through them. Once the trees, the mountains, the gods, the Asuras, the men, the Uragas, the seven ṛṣis, the Yakṣas, the Apsarases, and the Pitṛs came to P. and calling him their emperor, etc asked boons from him. Taking his Ājagava bow, P. caused them to milk the Earth by means of a calf, a milker, and vessels for various kinds of milk the śāla tree, the fig tree, a vessel of udumbara wood, torn buds . the eastern hill, Meru, a stone vessel, gems and herbs . a god, things capable of bestowing strength . The Asuras Virocana, Dvimūrdhan, an unbaked pot, wine . Men Manu Svāyambhuva, Pṛthu, cultivation and crops . The serpents Takṣaka, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, a gourd, poison . The seven ṛṣis Soma, Bṛhaspati, chandas, the Vedas . The Yakṣas Vṛṣadhvaja, Vaiśravaṇa, an unbaked pot, the power of disappearing at will . . The Gandharvas and the Apsarases Citraratha, Viśvaruci, a lotus, perfumes . The Pitṛs Yama Vaivasvata, Antaka, silvern vessels, svadhā . To this day the creatures exist in the same way. P. caused golden images to be made of every article on earth and bestowed them all on the brahmans at his great horse sacrifice, also, elephants of gold also the whole world, . b, . f . When P. had sprung from the right hand of Vena, the M. ṛ R and the gods told him to observe righteousness and punish the wicked, etc. Śukra became his priest, the Vālakhilyas his counsellors, the Sārasvatas his companions, the M. ṛ. Garga became his astrologer Sūta and Māgadha became his panegyrists, he gave to Sūta the land lying on the sea coast, to Māgadha Magadha. P. made the earth even, removing the rocks lying around with the horn of his bow by this means the hills and the mountains became enlarged. Then Viṣṇu, etc. crowned P. and gave him rich gifts steeds, chariots, etc came into existence as soon as P. thought of them. At this time there was neither decrepitude nor famine, etc nobody had any fear from reptiles and thieves, etc. when he proceeded to the sea, the waters used to be solidified, the mountains granted him passage, etc. He drew from the earth as a milker from a cow seventeen kinds of crops for the Y Rā and N etc. He caused all creatures to regard righteousness as the foremost of all things he was called rājan and kṣatriya, etymology of the name Pṛthivī. Viṣṇu confirmed his power and entered his body in consequence of his penances for this reason the entire universe bows to the king as to a god. At this time a gold lotus was born from Viṣṇus brow, from that lotus was born the goddess Śrī, who became the spouse of Dharma their son was Artha all the three were established in sovereignty. The king is really a portion of Viṣṇu on earth. He who once beheld his amiable face became obedient to him, . f It was Pṛthu Vainya who first created the bow he also milked the earth for very many grain and protected the earth virtuously as before, . b, . Prajāpati, Vainya.
Pṛthuśravas1, one or more ancient kings .
Pṛthuśravas2, a brahman .
Pṛthuśravas3, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Pṛthuśravas4, a serpent .
Pṛthūdaka, a tīrtha on the Sarasvatī . They say that Kurukṣetra is holy, that Sarasvatī is holier than Kurukṣetra, that the tīrthas are holier than Sarasvatī, and P. holier than the tīrthas. It has been sung by Sanat kumāra and Vyāsa that he who, reciting prayer, gives up his body in P. shall not die . Even the sinful attain to heaven by bathing in P . l, . b, .
Pṛthuhara = Śiva, .
Pṛthulāśva, an ancient king .
Pṛthulākṣa, an ancient king .
Pṛthuvaktrā, a mātṛ. u, .
Pṛthuvega, an ancient king .
Pṛthvī = Pṛthivī, .
Pucchāṇḍaka, a serpent .
Pudgala = Śiva .
Pūjanī, name of a bird. b, .
Pukkaśa or Pukkasa, name of a caste, .
Pulaha, a ṛṣi, one of the mind born sons of Brahmán . u, . b, . c, . b, .
Pulastya, a ṛṣi, one of the mind born sons of Brahmán, . u, . b, . c, . b, . Brahmarṣi, Brahmayoni, Viprarṣi.
Pulastyatīrthayātrā .
Pulina, a Nāga .
Pulinda, pl a barbarous people . b, . b, . Pulindaka, pl.
Pulinda, sg. .
Pulindaka, pl a people . Pulinda, pl.
Pulkasa, v. Pukkaśa.
Pulomā, the wife of Bhṛgu. P the wife of Bhṛgu, had first been betrothed to the Rākṣasa Puloman, who one day when Bhṛgu was absent came to carry her away, and asked the sacrificial fire whether she was rightly his or Bhṛgus wife. The Fire answered that she was Bhṛgus, by whom she had been taken with holy rites and invocations . When Puloman began to carry her away Cyavana dropped from her womb, and Puloman instantly was converted to ashes. Of her tears Brahmán formed the river Vadhūsarā, Bhṛgu cursed Agni, .
Pulomā, a female Asura .
Puloman, a Rākṣasa, or Asura . b, . Dānava, Dānavanandana, Rakṣas.
Puṃs = Śiva .
Punaścandrā, .
Punarāvartanandā, name of a tīrtha. u By bathing in P as also in Mahānandā, one attains to Nandana. By bathing in the tīrtha Urvaśī on the river Lohitya on the day of full moon of the month of Kārttika one obtains the merits of a puṇḍarīka sacrifice, .
Punarvasu1, name of a nakṣatra .
Punarvasu2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Puṇḍarīka1, an ancient king .
Puṇḍarīka2, a tīrtha .
Puṇḍarīka3, a serpent .
Puṇḍarīkā, an Apsaras .
Puṇḍarīkākṣa1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Puṇḍarīkākṣa2 = Śiva .
Puṇḍarīkavanālaya = Śiva .
Puṇḍarīkekṣaṇa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Puṇḍarīyaka, a Viśvadeva .
Pundra, v. Puṇḍra1.
Puṇḍra1, an ancient king .
Puṇḍra2 .
Puṇḍra, pl a people . e, . Pauṇḍra, pl Pauṇḍrika, pl Puṇḍraka, pl.
Puṇḍrādhipa = Vāsudeva, .
Puṇḍraka .
Puṇḍraka, pl. = Puṇḍra, pl .
Puñjikasthalā, an Apsaras .
Puṇya1, name of a lake . Puṇyākhya2.
Puṇya2 = Viṣṇu .
Puṇyā, a river .
Puṇyacañcu = Śiva .
Puṇyaśloka = Nala, q.v.
Puṇyaśravaṇakīrtana = Viṣṇu .
Puṇyajana, pl a designation of certain supernatural beings, as Yakṣas or Rākṣasas, .
Puṇyākhya1, name of one or more hermitages . Do name of a lake .
Puṇyakīrti = Viṣṇu .
Puṇyakṛt, a Viśvadeva .
Puṇyanāman, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Puṇyodakā, a river .
Puramālinī, a river .
Purāṇa, sg. and pl .
Purāṇa = Śiva .
Pūraṇa, a ṛṣi .
Purandara1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Viṣṇu .
Purandarasuta = Arjuna, .
Purañjaya, a Kuru warrior .
Purātana = Viṣṇu .
Purāvatī, a river .
Pūrayitṛ = Viṣṇu .
Purikā, name of a city .
Pūrṇa1, a serpent .
Pūrṇa2, a Devagandharva .
Pūrṇa3 = Viṣṇu .
Pūrṇabhadra, a serpent .
Pūrṇāśā, v. Parṇāśā.
Pūrṇamukha, a serpent .
Pūrṇāṅgada, a serpent .
Pūrṇāyus, a Devagandharva .
Purocana, name of a man, a confidant and helper of Duryo dhana .
Puroḍāśabhāgahara = Mahāpuruṣa .
Puroravas, v. Purūravas.
Puru1, v. Pūru1.
Puru2, a king at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira .
Puru3, the charioteer of Arjuna .
Puru4, a mountain .
Pūru1, an ancient king, son of Yayāti. . f From P. the Pauravas descended, . b . b, .
Pūru2, v. Puru3.
Pūru3, a prince .
Puruhūta = Indra, q.v. Do. = Mahāpuruṣa .
Purujit1, an ancient king .
Purujit2, a Kunti prince . Kuntibhoja, Kuntivardhana1.
Purujit3 = Viṣṇu .
Purukutsa, an ancient king, son of Māndhātṛ .
Purumīḍha, a prince .
Purumitra, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Kurupravīra.
Purūravas, an ancient king, son of Ilā, and husband of Urvaśī . P. was born of Ilā, who was both his father and mother. P. held sway over thirteen dvīpas, and though a human being he was always surrounded with beings who were not human. He robbed the brahmans of their wealth. Sanat kumāra then came from Brahmaloka and gave him good advice, which he rejected. Then P who intoxicated with power had lost his reason, was destroyed by the curse of the maharṣis. Accompanied by Urvaśī, he, for sacrificial purposes, brought the fires from the Gandharvaloka duly arranged in three places, . P. had from Urvaśī six sons Āyus, Dhīmat, Amāvasu, Dṛḍhāyus, Vanāyus, and Śatāyus. Āyus married Svarbhānavī, and had from her the sons Nahuṣa, Vṛddhaśarman, Rāji, Gaya, and Anenas . e, . b, . Aila.
Purusattama = Viṣṇu .
Puruṣa
Pūruṣa = Puruṣa, .
Puruṣaśreṣṭha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Puruṣasattama = Kṛṣṇa, .
Puruṣavara = Viṣṇu =, .
Puruṣottama = Kṛṣṇa, . Uttamapūruṣa.
Puruṣottama2, said of various men, . Do dual = Nara and Nārāyaṇa, .
Puruṣṭuta = Mahāpuruṣa .
a section of Sambhavaparvan . PūruPauṣṭī. Pravīra, Īśvara, Raudrāśva . Manasyu . Ṛceyu others . Śakta others . Matināra. Taṃsu, Mahat, Atiratha, Druhyu. ĪlinaRathantarī. DuṣyantaŚakuntalā, Śūra, Bhīma, Pravasu, Vasu. Bharata. Bharata obtained from Bharadvāja a son of the name Bhumanyu, who became his heir apparent. Bharata. Bhumanyu . Diviratha, Suhotra, Suhotṛ, Suhavis, Suyajus, Ṛcīka. Ajamīḍha others . Ṛkṣa, Duṣyanta, Parameṣṭhin, Jahnu others . Saṃvaraṇa. Pāñcālāh. Kuśikāḥ. Saṃvaraṇa . SaṃvaraṇaTapatī Saurī. Kuru . Avikṣit others . Parīkṣit others . Janamejaya others . Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Pāṇḍu, Bāhlīka others Kuṇḍika, Hastin others . Among the grandsons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra three became famous Pratīpa, Dharmanetra, and Sunetra. Pratīpa had three sons Devāpi, Śāntanu, and Bāhlīka. Devāpi ated an ascetic life Śāntanu and Bāhlīka became kings. There were many other kings like to the Devarṣis, in the race of Bharata and Manu, who aned the Aila dynasty . Janamejaya wished to hear the same more in full, commencing from Manu. Dakṣa. Aditi. Vivasvat. Manu. Ilā. Purūravas. Ayus. Nahuṣa. Uśanas. Vṛṣaparvan. Yayāti. Devayānī. Śarmiṣṭhā Yadu, Turvasu, Druhyu, Anu, Pūru . Yādavāḥ. Janamejaya . Prācinvat . Saṃyāti . Ahaṃyāti . Sārvabhauma . Jayatsena . Avācīna . Ariha . Mahābhauma . Ayutanāyin . Akrodhana . Devātithi . Ariha . Ṛkṣa . Matināra . Taṃsu . Īlina . Īlina . Duṣyanta other sons. Bharata . Bhumanyu . Suhotra . Hastin . Vikuṇṭhana . Ajamīḍha Saṃvaraṇa other sons. Kuru . Vidūratha . Anaśvan . Parīkṣit . Bhīmasena . Praticravas. Pratīpa . Devāpi, Śāntanu, Bāhlīka. Devavrata or Bhīṣma, Vicitravīrya, Citrāṅgada. Vicitravīrya died without leaving a child. Then Satyavatī began to think how the dynasty of Duṣyanta might be perpetuated, and she recollected the ṛṣi Dvaipāyana and prevailed upon him to beget three children for Vicitravīrya Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Pāṇḍu, Vidura. In consequence of a boon granted by Dvaipāyana, Dhṛtarāṣṭra had sons by Gāndhārī, of whom the most celebrated were Duryodhana, Duḥśāsana, Vikarṇa, and Citrasena. Pāṇḍu had two wives Kuntī or Pṛthā, and Mādrī. One when hunting, he with his arrow pierced a ṛṣi cohabiting with a deer. The ṛṣi cursed him, saying that he should also die when in such a state. Pāṇḍu then prevailed upon Kuntī to raise offspring for him, and by Dharma she had Yudhiṣṭhira, by Māruta Bhīmasena, and by Śakra Arjuna. He then caused her to impart on Mādrī the vidyā, and Mādrī by the Aśvins had Nakula and Sahadeva. One day when Pāṇḍu, filled with desire, touched Mādrī, he immediately died, and Mādrī ascended the funeral pyre with him, after having recom mended her twins to Kuntī. Then the Pāṇḍavas with Kuntī were taken by the ascetics to Hāstinapura and introduced to Bhīṣma and Vidura, whereafter the ascetics disappeared from sight, while flames poured n upon the earth and the drums of the gods were heard. They then performed the obsequial rites for their father. As they were being brought up there Duryodhana became exceedingly jealous of them. Brief mention of Duryodhanas efforts against the Pāṇḍavas how they are sent by Dhṛtarāṣṭra to Vāraṇāvata to be burnt in a lac house, but are rescued by Vidura killing of Hiḍimba they go to Ekacakrā kill the Rākṣasa Baka go to Pāñcāla nagara, obtain Draupadī, and return home. The eleven sons of the Pāṇḍavas Prativindhya Sutasoma Śrutakīrti Śatānīka Śrutakarman Yaudheya Sarvaga Abhimanyu
pūrvā, sc. diś .
Pūrvābhirāmā, a river .
Pūrvacitti, an Apsaras .
Pūrvadeva = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Arjuna, . Do dual = Nara Nārāyaṇau, . Do. = Asura, .
Pūrvanivāsa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Pūrvapālin, a king .
Pūrvapūrvānugaṇḍikā, name of a place. j, .
Pūṣan, a god, one of the Ādityas . b, . u, . b, . d, .
Pūṣaṇā, a mātṛ. u, .
Pūṣānuja = Indra, .
Pūṣātmaja1 = Karṇa, .
Pūṣātmaja2 = Indra, v. Pūṣānuja.
Puṣkara1, sg. and pl name of a group of tīrthas . b, . P. is the tīrtha of the god of the gods, where the Ādityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Sādhyas, the Marudgaṇas, the Gandharvas, and the Apsarases are ever present, and where the gods, the Daityas, and the Brahmarṣis have obtained great merit by ascetic devotions. The bathing there is equal to the bathing in all tīrthas together and to horse sacrifices, and frees even śūdras from rebirth especially the visiting of P. on the day of the full moon in the month of Kārttika is equal in merit to the performing of agnihotras during a hundred years, and leads to the worlds of Brahmán dwelling twelve years purely at P. gives the merit of all sacrifices and leads to the abode of Brahmán. There are three white hillocks and three springs, known from the remotest times we not know why by the name of P. it is difficult to go to P etc . i, . b, . c By bathing in P. and Prabhāsa and Naimiṣa, and the ocean and Devikā and Indramārga, and Svarṇabindu, one attains to heaven, . m, . c, .
Puṣkara3, son of Varuṇa .
Puṣkara3, brother of Nala P. won from Nala his king, etc.Nala vanquished P. at dice and recovered his king, etc.Karṇap.all. to Nalopā khyānaparvan
Puṣkara4, name of a dvīpa .
Puṣkara5, name of a mountain in the dvīpa Puṣkara .
Puṣkara6 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Puṣkaradhāriṇī, wife of the brahman Satya .
Puṣkarākṣa = Kṛṣṇa . Do. = Skanda, .
Puṣkaramālinī, the sabhā of Indra . Do the sabhā of Varuṇa .
Puṣkarāraṇya, name of a forest in the tīrtha Puṣkara . Puṣkara1.
Puṣkarasthapati = Śiva .
Puṣkarekṣaṇa = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Indra, .
Puṣkariṇī, wife of Bhumanyu .
Pūṣṇo dantabhid = Śiva, .
Pūṣṇo dantavināśa = Śiva, .
Pūṣṇo dantavināśana = Śiva, .
Puṣpa, a serpent . the two next.
Puṣpadaṃṣṭra, a serpent . the next.
Puṣpadanta1, a serpent. d, .
Puṣpadanta2, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Puṣpadhāraṇa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Puṣpahāsa = Viṣṇu .
Puṣpaka, the vimāna of Kubera. b P. was constructed by Viśvakarman, . x, .
Puṣpaketu = Kāma, .
Puṣpāmbhas, a tīrtha .
Puṣpānana, a Yakṣa .
Puṣpavat1, a mountain on Kuśadvīpa .
Puṣpavat2, an Asura. b, .
Puṣpavatī, a tīrtha .
Puṣpaveṇī, a river .
Puṣpodakā, a river .
Puṣpotkaṭā, name of a female Rākṣasa.
Puṣṭa = Viṣṇu .
Puṣṭi, a goddess .
Puṣṭimati, a fire .
Puṣya, name of a nakṣatra = Tiṣya, also = the time of the moons conjunction with Puṣya . Tiṣya.
Put, name of a hell . Cf .
Pūtanā, a female demon .
Pūtanā, a mātṛ. u, .
Pūtātman = Viṣṇu .
Putradarśana .
. Janamejaya said Tell me what that wonderful feat was which M. ṛ. Vyāsa accomplished after his promise to Dhṛtarāṣṭra when he had taken up his abode in the forest with Gāndhārī and Kuntī, and after Vidura had left his body and entered into Yudhiṣṭhira, and when all the Pāṇḍavas were in the ascetic retreat for how many days did Yudhiṣṭhira stay with his men in the woods on what food did the Pāṇḍavas support themselves with their men and wives Vaiśampāyana said The Pāṇḍavas passed about a month in that forest, supporting themselves on diverse kinds of food and drink. Then Vyāsa came there and Nārada, etc. they sat n on sacred seats and on seats of peacock feathers Gāndhārī, etc. also sat n they spoke of Ṛ and As. Then Vyāsa said that he knew that burning grief in the heart of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc. let G and M. ṛ. to day behold the energy of my penances therefore tell me what wish of thine shall grant to day. Dhṛtarāṣṭra wished to see his dead children and kinsmen, mentioning Duryodhana and the slaughter of Bhīṣma and Droṇa. Hearing this the grief of Gāndhārī, etc. became fresh Gāndhārī said that for sixteen years Dhṛtarāṣṭra never had slept for grief and also Kṛṣṇā, etc. grieved exceedingly. Vyāsa then asked Kuntī to tell what she wished . Kuntī told the story of Karṇas birth Vyāsa promised to show her Karṇa, and said that she had no fault in what had happened about the birth of Karṇa the gods beget after five methods Vyāsa promised to show everyone the persons whom they wished to see and who were in the other world they were all portions of . both G Aps Pś Gh Rā Puṇyajanāḥ, Si . ṛ and Dā. met with death on the battlefield of Kurukṣetra he explained who among the dead, etc was what Dhṛtarāṣṭra was the Gandharva king Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc. . They all, Dhṛtarāṣṭra with his ministers and the Pāṇḍavas and Ṛ. and G proceeded towards the Bhāgīrathī and waited for the advent of night at sunset they bathed and finished their evening rites . When night came, Vyāsa plunged into the Bhāgīrathī for a bath, and summoned all the deceased warriors, who all rose up from the water with a loud uproar, everyone presenting the same aspect that he did when clad for battle there were Bhīṣma, etc. all of them were now robed in celestial vestments and had brilliant earrings they were free from all animosity, etc. G. sang their praises, etc. each of them was waited upon by bands of Aps. Vyāsa gave Dhṛtarāṣṭra celestial vision endued with celestial knowledge, Gāndhārī saw all the slain Dhṛtarāṣṭra became full of joy . Divested of wrath and malice, the spirits of the dead mingled with the living in happy converse . Having sported with one another for that night they, taking leave from each other, returned to the places they had come from, Vyāsa dismissing them within the twinkling of an eye of Rā. and Pś. some proceeded to the Uttarakurus, others to the gods. With Vyāsas permission, many wis plunged into the waters of the Bhāgīrathī in order to accompany their deceased lords, and proceeded to those regions where their husbands had found their abodes. Vyāsa granted to all the men there assembled the fruition of their wishes. People of diverse realms, hearing of this meeting between the dead and living, became highly delighted . Sauti said Janamejaya filled with joy asked Vaiśampāyana, how it is possible for persons whose bodies have been destroyed to reappear in those very forms. Vaiśampāyana said Acts are never destroyed bodies are born of acts so also are features, etc quoting a śruti in the horse sacrifice . Dhṛtarāṣṭra had never beheld his own sons, but got spiritual vision from Vyāsa, he had learnt all the royal duties, as also the Vedas and Upaniṣads Vidura attained to high success through penances. Janamejaya said If Vyāsa shows me my father as he was when he died may then believe all that thou hast told me. Sauti said Then Vyāsa brought Parikṣit, and Śamīka and his son Śṛṅgin all the counsellors and ministers of the king beheld them. Janamejaya, performing the final bath in his sacrifice, highly rejoiced he poured the sacred water over his father, as also over himself then he said to Āstīka that this his sacrifice was fraught with many wonderful incidents Āstīka praised Vyāsa and the snake sacrifice, from which Takṣaka had with difficulty escaped, the worship of Ṛ etc. Janamejaya honoured Āstīka, and then asked Ṛ. Vaiśampāyana about Dhṛtarāṣṭras further residence in the woods . Janamejaya said Having seen his sons, etc what did Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and king Yudhiṣṭhira also, Vaiśampā yana said Beholding that wonderful sight, the reappearance of his children, R. ṛ. Dhṛtarāṣṭra became relieved of his grief and returned to his retreat the people and Ṛ dismissed by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, returned home. Vyāsa came and asked Dhṛtarāṣṭra to dismiss the Pāṇḍavas, who now had passed more than a month in the woods. Dhṛtarāṣṭra addressed Yudhiṣṭhira affectionately, and dismissed him and his brothers. Yudhiṣṭhira offered to wait upon his uncle and his two mothers Gāndhārī dissuaded him from that step. Yudhiṣṭhira said that his mind was wholly set upon penances, as the whole earth were empty now, etc. Sahadeva, saying that he dared not leave his mother, urged Yudhiṣṭhira to return to the capital he would himself remain, engaged in penances and in serving the old king and his mothers. Kuntī affectionately dissuaded her sons from remaining with her and thereby obstructing her penances. They then took leave of their mother and Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who blessed and comforted Yudhiṣṭhira, etc and embraced them one after another. Then Gāndhārī blessed them, and Kuntī kissed them on their heads, etc. Gāndhārī and Kuntī embraced Draupadī, etc and instructed them. Yudhiṣṭhira with his wives and troops and kinsmen set out for Hāstinapura .
Rabheṇaka, a serpent .
Raśmivat, a Viśvadeva .
Rādhā, wife of Adhiratha, foster mother of Karṇa. b, .
Rādhābhartṛ = Adhiratha, .
Rādhāsuta, Rādhātmaja, Rādheya = Karṇa, q.v.
Rāga = Śiva .
Rāgā, name of a daughter of Aṅgiras .
Rāghava = Rāma Dāśarathi, .
Rāghava, dual = Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, .
Rāghava, pl. .
Raghu, an ancient king .
Raghukulodvaha = Lakṣmaṇa, .
Raghunandana = Rāma Dāśa rathi, .
Rahasyā, a river .
Rāhu, an Asura, the demon who causes eclipses . b, . b, . b, . b, . Daitya, Dānava, Graha, Svarbhānu.
Raibhya, a brahman, father of Arvāvasu and Parāvasu . b At the hermitage of R. the kavi Yavakrīta Bhāradvāja perished, . c, . b, .
Raibhyaputra Parāvasu, .
Raivata1, a mountain near Dvārakā . Raivataka.
Raivata2, a ṛṣi. .
Raivata3, a graha, .
Raivata4, an ancient king .
Raivata5, a Rudra .
Raivata6, adj. .
Raivataka1, a mountain .
Raivataka2, a mountain in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Raja, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Rājadharman = Nāḍījaṅgha, . Dharmarāj.
Rājadharmānuśāsana .
. After the completion of the water rites by the Pāṇḍavas, etc many Brahmarṣis, etc came to Yudhiṣṭhira. Nārada congratulated Yudhiṣṭhira upon his success. Yudhiṣṭhira lamented the loss of his kinsmen Yudhiṣthira at the match of dice had wondered seeing that Karṇas feet resembled the feet of Kuntī he inquired of Nārada, why the earth had swallowed up the wheels of Karṇas chariot . Nārada recited to Yudhiṣṭhira the story of Kaṛnas pupilage with Droṇa and Rāma and the curse called n upon him by a brahman whose cow Karṇa had inadvertently slain then the story of Karṇas extraordinary powers of endurance, in consequence of which his real caste became known to Rāma, who there upon cursed him for his deceit the worm Alarka was an Asura named Daṃśa, who in the Kṛta age had ravished the spouse of Bhṛgu and been cursed by him, until he should be liberated by Paraśu Rāma. Karṇa, arriving before Duryo dhana, told him have mastered every weapon . Nārada said To a self choice at Rājapura, the capital of the Kāliṅga king Citrāṅgada Duryodhana, Śiśupāla, etc repaired the maiden passed by Duryodhana, who then took her up on his chariot and abducted her by force. Karṇa, riding on his chariot, proceeded in Duryodhanas rear. The kings pursued Karṇa and Duryodhana but Karṇa made them all turn away, and Duryodhana reached Hāstinapura with the maiden . Nārada said The Māgadha king Jarāsandha challenged Karṇa to a single combat at last they fought with bare arms, and Karṇa was about to sever the two portions of Jarāsandhas body that had been united together by Jarā then Jarāsandha gave up all desire of hostility and gave unto Karṇa the town Mālinī . From that time he ruled over Campā and the Aṅgas agreeably to the wishes of Duryodhana. Allusions to, etc. . . ṛ. Nārada became silent Yudhiṣṭhira grieved Kuntī comforted Yudhiṣṭhira by telling him that neither she nor Sūrya could dissuade Karṇa from fighting the Pāṇḍavas . Yudhiṣṭhiras lament before Arjuna he wished to renounce the sovereignty . Arjuna addressed Yudhiṣṭhira, justifying war and approving of the acquisition of wealth, quoting Nahuṣa, and citing the conduct of the gods and Dā which is sanctioned by the Vedas this earth formerly belonged to king Dilīpa, etc. she now belongs to thee a great sacrifice awaits thee if thou t not perform this sacrifice, the sins of this king shall all be thine those subjects whose king performs a horse sacrifice...all become pure, as shown by the example of Mahādeva this is the great path called Dāśaratha . Unmoved by Arjunas words, Yudhiṣṭhira desired to lead the life of a religious recluse . Bhīmas address to Yudhiṣṭhira commending sovereignty . Arjuna recited the story of the discourse between Śakra and certain youths desirous of leading a forest life . Nakula addressed Yudhiṣṭhira, blaming renunci ation and commending the life of a householder . Sahadeva recommended to Yudhiṣṭhira a life of action with the soul free from attachments . Draupadī reminded Yudhiṣṭhira of his former counsels . Arjuna praised him who wields the rod of chastisement Indra, by the slaughter of Vṛtra, became the great Indra those among the gods that are given to slaughtering others are aed much more by men Rudra, etc. are all slaughterers all people bend to these gods, but not to Brahmán or Dhātṛ or Pūṣan at any time, except a few men of noble disposition . Bhīmas second address to Yudhiṣṭhira, urging him to subdue his grief . Yudhiṣṭhira exposed the folly of earthly enjoyments quoting Janaka my treasures are immense yet possess nothing if again the whole of Mithilā were burnt, nothing of mine will be burnt . Arjuna recited the story of the discourse between the Videha king Janaka and his queen, in which the latter explained the claims of a life of poverty and renunciation . Yudhi ṣṭhiras reply to Arjuna on the vanity of wealth . Devasthāna pointed out to Yudhiṣṭhira that the period had not come when he could retire into the woods, and recommended the assumption of sovereignty with his soul freed from attachment, quoting a discourse which Bṛhaspati delivered to Indra the Ṛ etc at the religion of Exertion, and attain to heaven through their acts . Arjuna justified before Yudhi ṣṭhira the slaughter of foes in battle Indra, himself, though a brahman, became a kṣatriya in his acts, and battled with his sinful kinsfolk times . Vyāsa dissuaded Yudhiṣṭhira from a life of retirement and commended a life of esticity, quoting a verse of Bṛhaspati, and reciting the story of R. ṛ. Sudyumna the brothers Śaṅkha and Likhita dwelled in two separate dwellings on the banks of Bāhudā once, when Śaṅkha had gone out, Likhita came to his asylum and ate many ripe fruits. Śaṅkha told him to confess to the king and ask him to inflict on him the punishment of a thief. King Sudyumna would par him but Likhita would not Sudyumna then caused his hands to be cut off Likhita, having asked par of Śaṅkha, was told by him to gratify Ṛ and P. at Bāhudā, upon which two hands grew out. Śaṅkha said that he was not his chastiser, but the king has been himself purified, as also thyself, along with P. That king became eminent by this act and obtained the highest success . Vyāsa exhorted Yudhiṣṭhira to grant the wishes of his brothers, perform sacrifices, and imitate the great monarchs of old, especially Hayagrīva . Hearing the words of Vyāsa and seeing Arjuna angry, Yudhiṣṭhira declared to Vyāsa that earthly rule could give him no delight. Vyāsa answered, pointing out the virtues of Time, quoting the old story recited by king Senajit in grief. Engaging in battle has been said to be the sacrifice for a king a due observance of the science of chastisement is his yoga and the gift of wealth in sacrifices in the shape of dakṣiṇā is his renunciation all this should be regarded as acts that sanctify him . Yudhiṣṭhiras reply to Arjuna recommending a life of yoga and austerities this is the practice of R regarded by . as brahmans this is the opinion of the Vaikhānasas the Ajāḥ, etc. have all gone to heaven by means of Vedic study by performing the acts indicated in the Vedas, battle, sacrifices, study of the Vedas, restrainment of passion, one goes to heaven by the southern path of the Sun the northern path is travelled by those devoted to yoga, and is much applauded by those conversant with the Purāṇas one acquires heaven through contentment, citing the discourse of Yayāti of old . Yudhiṣṭhira censured himself for his cupidity and for the slaughter he caused of his kinsmen Bhīṣma had, by the energy of his weapons, burnt Ugrāyudha, etc. Vyāsa comforted Yudhiṣṭhira by explaining the action of Destiny, and exhorted him to work . Vyāsa recited the old story, that is known by the name of Aśmans discourse the Videha king Janaka, filled with sorrow, questioned the wise brahman Aśman as to how a man should behave upon occasions of the accession and the destruction of both kinsmen and wealth. Aśman said that Destiny and Time are inevitable no person can see either heaven or hell the scriptures, however, are the eyes of the virtuous frame thy conduct according to the scriptures. Janaka became freed from grief enjoy the earth, O son of Kuntī . Arjuna asked Kṛṣṇa to dispel Yudhiṣṭhiras grief. Kṛṣṇa asked Yudhi ṣṭhira not to grieve for men who died heroically in battle in the observance of kṣatriya duties, quoting the Ṣoḍaśarājopā khyāna, i.e. the old discourse of Nārada before Sṛñjaya when the latter was deeply afflicted with grief on account of the death of his son. Sṛñjaya was freed from grief, and Nārada gave back to him his son Suvarṇaṣṭhīvin, whom Parvata had given him, and who had been bereft of life that child should live, years . Requested by Yudhiṣṭhira, Kṛṣṇa told Nārada Parvatopākhyāna . Thereafter Nārada told Suvarṇasṭhīvi sambhavopākhyāna . Vyāsa exhorted Yudhiṣṭhira to shake off his grief and assume the reins of sovereignty. Yudhiṣṭhira feared that the guilt of slaughter had stained him Vyāsa repeated his observations on Destiny as Yudhiṣṭhira still was remorseful, Vyāsa repeated his observations on Time, and pointed to expiatory rites, illustrating the case by the war of, years, by which the gods, having slain Dai gained possession of heaven, and slew, brahmans called Śālāvṛkāḥ who had joined the Dā. thou hast only followed the path formerly trodden by the very gods men like you never go to hell. He recommended a horse sacrifice as an expiation, mentioning that Indra, assisted by the Maruts, gradually performed sacrifices and became Śatakratu, and is aed in the heavens by Aps Ṛ and . . Vyāsa discoursed on expiation and indicated the acts for which there should be expiation, citing the sage Uddālaka, who caused his son Śvetaketu to be begotten by disciple, etc and declared that by penances, religious rites, and gifts one may wash off sins if one s not commit them anew, and indicated diverse kinds of expiation for diverse kinds of sins . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Vyāsa declared what food is clean and what is unclean . Yudhiṣṭhira desired to hear of the duties of kings and of the four different orders. Vyāsa, casting his eyes on Nārada, directed Yudhiṣṭhira to apply to Bhīṣma for discourses on kingly duties, as Bhīṣma, having gratified . ṛ. with Bṛh, at their head, had acquired a knowledge of the duties of kings, and of that science, with its interpretations, that Uśanas and Bṛhaspati know and a knowledge of all the Vedas with their branches, from Vasiṣṭha and Cyavana of Bhṛgus race in olden days he studied under Sanatkumāra he learned the duties of the Yatis from Mārkaṇḍeya and obtained all weapons from Rāma and Indra although childless, yet he has many regions of bliss before himself B. ṛ. were always his courtiers. Yudhiṣṭhira was ashamed to approach Bhīṣma. Kṛṣṇa exhorted Yudhiṣṭhira to rise up, shaking off his grief . Thus addressed by Kṛṣṇa, etc Yudhi ṣṭhira gave up his grief and anxiety, and with his brothers and the other kings, headed by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, set out for Hāstinapura. The procession described . The citizens welcomed Yudhiṣṭhira and Draupadī, etc. . Yudhi ṣṭhira entered the palace with Dhaumya and Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and was blessed by the brahmans, but cursed by Cārvāka, a Rā. who had disguised himself as a brahman, and a friend of Duryodhana the brahmans killed Cārvāka by uttering the mere sound huṃ . Kṛṣṇa related In the Kṛta age Rā. Cārvāka performed penances in Badarī at last he solicited from Brahmán the boon of immunity from fear at the hands of every being in the universe, which Brahmán granted him, only with the limitation that he should be careful not to offend brahmans. Then he began to cause trouble to the gods Brahmán predicted Cārvākas friendship with Duryodhana, and that he would insult the brahmans . The ceremony of Yudhiṣṭhiras installation on the throne described he made gifts to the brahmans, who all blessed him and his brothers . Yudhiṣṭhira answered and enjoined respect for his aged uncle, disposed of the high appointments of state, and caused the obsequial rites to be performed in honour of the slaughtered heroes, and performed acts of kindness to the ladies, wied in the battle, the destitute, the blind, and helpless . Then he aed Kṛṣṇa, and assigned to his brothers proper residences from among the palaces of the Kuru princes slain in battle . They passed a happy night in their respective abodes, and in the morning presented themselves before king Yudhiṣṭhira . Yudhiṣṭhiras gifts to diverse persons . Then he addressed Kṛṣṇa, whom he found rapt in meditation he uttered a hymn to Kṛṣṇa, who awoke and praised Bhīṣma, asking Yudhiṣṭhira to resort to Bhīṣma for instruction. Yudhiṣṭhira requested Kṛṣṇa to grant Bhīṣma the sight of his divine person. Kṛṣṇa caused Sātyaki to let Dāruka yoke his chariot with Sugrīva and Śaibya, etc. . Descrip tion of the bed of arrows on which Bhīṣma lay, surrounded by Ṛ. Vyāsa, etc. . Bhīṣma hymned Kṛṣṇa . Kṛṣṇa moved by Bhīṣmas aations, bestowed upon him heavenly knowledge compassing the Past, the Present, and the Future, and went away. Those holy brahmans aed Bhīṣma and Kṛṣṇa. Seeing the devotion of Bhīṣma, Kṛṣṇa suddenly rose from his seat and ascended his chariot with Sātyaki Yudhiṣṭhira and Arjuna mounted another Bhīmasena and the twins a third Kṛpa, Yuyutsu, and Sañjaya on their respective chariots . Then Kṛṣṇa, etc proceeded to Kurukṣetra . Kṛṣṇa pointed out to Yudhiṣṭhira the five lakes of Rāma Bhārgava. Requested by Yudhiṣṭhira, Kṛṣṇa related Rāmopākhyāna . Then he proceeded quietly in his chariot . Yudhiṣṭhiras eulogy of Rāma . Beholding from a distance the spot on which Bhīṣma lay, Yudhiṣṭhira, etc descended from their chariots and approached and saluted the Ṛ. . Seeing Bhīṣma on the point of death, Kṛṣṇa addressed him kindly, and eulogized him . Bhīṣma saluted Kṛṣṇa, and beheld his eternal form. Kṛṣṇa said that it was owing to Bhīṣmas devotion that he had displayed his celestial form to him those regions, O king are ready for thee whence there is no return fifty six days still remain for thee to live when Sūrya turns to his northerly course, you shall go there . and riding on their chariots, are waiting for thee invisibly. Kṛṣṇa asked Bhīṣma to instruct Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. when thou wilt leave this world for that, all knowledge will expire with thee . Bhīṣma alleged physical weakness and mental darkness as reasons for his inability to obey Kṛṣṇa, and he also hesitated to speak in Kṛṣṇas presence. Kṛṣṇa removed Bhīṣmas pain and granted him power to recollect everything and behold the universe like a fish in a limpid stream. M. ṛ. with Vyāsa aed Kṛṣṇa with words, accompanied by Ṛc, Yojus, and Sāman verses celestial flowers fell, and Aps. sang, etc. At sunset the M. ṛ rising up, saluted Kṛṣṇa, Bhīṣma, and Yudhiṣṭhira. Upon this, Kṛṣṇa, returned to Hāstinapura, after having saluted Bhīṣma, saying that they would return next day . Kṛṣṇa passed the night happily, performed his morning rites, and was welcomed with music and song at early dawn asked by Kṛṣṇa, Sātyaki saw Yudhiṣṭhira and apprised him of Kṛṣṇas readiness to accompany him into the presence of Bhīṣma. Yudhiṣṭhira asked Arjuna to see that his chariot was made ready then he, with the twins, etc proceeded to Kṛṣṇas abode. Kṛṣṇa, accompanied by Sātyaki, mounted his chariot, yoked with Balāhaka, etc urged by Dāruka. The princes set out. Arrived near Bhīṣma, Kṛṣṇa, etc alighting from their chariots, saluted Ṛ. by raising their right hands. Yudhiṣṭhira approached Bhīṣma, eying him timidly . Many Ṛ. and Sā etc came to Bhīṣma. Nārada urged the Pāṇḍavas to take advantage of the short span of life still left to Bhīṣma for soliciting him to discourse on morality. Yudhiṣṭhira requested Kṛṣṇa to put questions to Bhīṣma. Bhīṣmas cheerful answer. He enquired of Kṛṣṇa why he was desired to discourse on morality and the duties of kings, Kṛṣṇas divine self being best fitted to so Kṛṣṇa explained that his motive was only the enhancement of Bhīṣmas glory thou hast always worshipped Ṛ. and . . Bhīṣma consented to discourse on morality and duty, and desired Yudhiṣṭhira to question him. Kṛṣṇa introduced Yudhiṣṭhira to Bhīṣma, who comforted Yudhi ṣṭhira, saying that what he had e he had e in observance of kṣatriya duties. Yudhiṣṭhira humbly approached Bhīṣma and touched his feet Bhīṣma, kissing his head, asked him to take a seat and question him without anxiety . Yudhiṣṭhira solicited Bhīṣma to discourse on kingly duties which are regarded as the root of all other duties in the world. Bhīṣma, bowing to Dharma, Kṛṣṇa, and the brahmans, set forth the general duties of kings he quoted two ślokas of Manu fire has sprung from water, the kṣatriya from the brahman, and iron from stone these three can exert their force on every other thing but on their origins, it is extinguished and two ślokas of M. ṛ. Uśanas and a śloka of Bṛhaspati . Continuation of Bhīṣmas discourse, enjoining readiness for action on kings quoting a śloka sung by Uśanas and one by king Marutta, agreeably to Bṛhaspatis opinion Bāhus son, king Sagara, who exiled his eldest son Asamañjas, who used to drown the children of the citizens in the Sarayū Ṛ. Uddālaka who cast off his favourite son Śvetaketu, because the latter used to invite brahmans with deceptive promises of entertain ment. The king should administer justice like Yama and amass wealth like Kubera. He quoted a verse sung in days of old by Bhārgava, in the narrative called Rāmacarita, on king
Rājagṛha, the metropolis of the Māgadhas . Girivraja.
rājan, pl. = Yakṣa, pl .
Rājanī, a river .
. To the horse sacrifice of king Aṣṭaka Vaiśvāmitri all kings repaired, also his brothers Pratardana, Vasumanas, and Śibi Auśīnara. After the sacrifice was completed, these four took Nārada on their chariot and asked him who of them should first fall from Heaven Nārada answered that Aṣṭaka should first come n, because he had praised himself for having given away thousands of kine then Pratardana, because he, though he had given to brahmans successively the four horses yoked to his chariot, and then had drawn the chariot himself, had e so with detraction then Vasumanas, because he, though he had twice at the svastivācana for the sake of a flowery chariot given the chariot to Nārada, because he praised it, had not e so on a third occasion Nārada himself would come n before Śibi, because Śibi, at the request of Vidhātṛ in the disguise of a brahman, who was desirous of trying Śibi, had cooked his son Bṛhadgarbha as food for the brahman without being angry, though the brahman meanwhile had set fire to Śibis abode and treasury and arsenal, and when the brahman ordered Śibi himself to eat his sons body Śibi was willing to it but the brahman said, Thou hast conquered wrath, there is nothing that thou canst not give to the brahmans, and withdrew his hand, and then Śibi beheld his son like a child of the gods, while the brahman disappeared and that Śibi had not e this for fame or wealth, etc but because this is not practised by the sinful .
Rājapura, a city of the Kāmbojas .
Rājarāja1 = Kubera, .
Rājarāja2 = Śiva, .
Rājarājan = Kubera, .
Rajas = Śiva .
. Yudhiṣ ṭhira consulted his counsellors, brothers, ṛtvijes, ministers, Dhaumya, Dvaipāyana, etc as to the rājasūya . They all encouraged him to perform it. All people lived happily under his sway and loved him Bhīma ruled over all men justly, Arjuna protected the people from enemies, Sahadeva administered justice impartially, Nakula behaved towards everybody with humility. There was no extortion, disease, etc. Yudhiṣṭhira sent a messenger to Kṛṣṇa in Dvāravatī, and Kṛṣṇa came to Indraprastha accompanied by Indrasena, and was consulted by Yudhiṣṭhira . Kṛṣṇa said that Yudhiṣṭhira, in order to become samrāj, ought to slay the Magadha king Jarāsandha, and deliver the princes whom Jarāsandha held shut up in a mountain hole in order to sacrifice them to Mahādeva . The now existing kṣatriyas are descended from the remnants of those who were exterminated by Rāma. They represent themselves to be the descendants of Aila and Ikṣvāku of those there are families. The Bhojas, descendants of Yayāti, are great and scattered all over the earth but now Jarāsandha, ruling the middle land, has overpowered them. His allies are Śiśupāla, who has become his senāpati the Karūṣa king Vakra, who fights by illusion Haṃsa and Ḍimbhaka Dantavakra, Karūṣa, Karabha, Meghavāhana Bhagadatta, the Yavana king, the ruler of the west, who bears on his head the most wonderful gem on earth, the old friend of thy father, and who chastises Muru and Naraka he obeys Jarāsandha, but in his heart he is tied by affection to thee the king of Aṅga, Vaṅga, Puṇḍra, and of the Kirātas, Pauṇḍraka Vāsudeva, who among the Cedis is called Puruṣottama, and always bears, from foolishness, the distinctive signs of Kṛṣṇa Bhīṣmaka, king of the Bhojas, the friend of Indra, who governs a fourth part of the world, who by his learning has conquered the Pāṇḍyas, Krathas, and Kaiśikas, and whose brother Ākṛti is like to Rāma Jāmadagnya, has placed himself under Jarāsandha, though Kṛṣṇa, etc his relatives, are engaged every day in ng what is agreeable to him. Only Yudhiṣṭhiras maternal uncle, the Kunti king Purujit, who has his inions in the west and the south, regards Yudhiṣṭhira with affection. The following peoples have fled for fear of Jarāsandha the eighteen tribes of the northern Bhojas have fled towards the west the Śūrasenas, Bhadrakāras, Bodhas, Śālvas, Paṭaccaras, Susthalas, Mukuṭṭas, Kulindas, and Kuntis the Śālvāyana kings with their brethren and followers, the southern Pāñcālas, and the eastern Kośalas, have all fled to the Kuntis the Matsyas and the Sannyastapādas have left their inions in the north and fled into the southern country all the Pāñcālas have fled in all directions. Jarāsandhas relations to the Yādavas were the following Kaṃsa, having persecuted the Yādavas, married Asti and Prāpti, daughters of Jarāsandha and sisters of Sahadeva, and began also to oppress the old chiefs of the Bhojas, who sought the help of Kṛṣṇa, etc. Kṛṣṇa bestowed upon Akrūra the daughter of Āhuka, and with Saṅkarṣaṇa he slew Kaṃsa and Sunāman. Then Jarāsandha took up arms, and the eighteen tribes thought they would be unable to check him even in years. His friends Haṃsa and Ḍimbhaka were incapable of being slain by weapons. Some other king, named Haṃsa, was slain by Rāma in the battle of the eighteen tribes then Ḍimbhaka, thinking that he could not live without Haṃsa, killed himself in the Yamunā, and Haṃsa, hearing that, also jumped into the Yamunā then Jarāsandha returned to his king, and the Yādavas continued to live at Mathurā. But the wi of Kaṃsa, the daughter of Jarāsandha, urging him to revenge the death of her husband, the Yādavas fled from Mathurā, and took up their abode in Kuśasthalī, aned by Raivata, and strongly fortified the Gomanta mountains, three yojanas in length. In the race of Kṛṣṇa there are, brothers . Āhuka has sons. Cārudeṣṇa with his brother, Cakradeva, Sātyaki, Kṛṣṇa, Rauhiṇeya, and Śāmba are seven heroes Kṛtavarman, Anādhṛṣṭi, Śamīka, Samitiñjaya, Kaṅka, Śaṅku, and Kunti are seven mahārathas then there are also two sons of Andhakabhoja and himself all these heroes, remembering the middle country, are now living among the Vṛṣṇis . Yudhiṣṭhira had some scruples, which were opposed by Bhīma and Kṛṣṇa, who cited from the Kṛta age five kings, who had become emperors Yauvanāśvi by the remission of taxes, Bhagīratha by protection, Kārtavīrya by asceticism, Bharata by strength, and Marutta by prosperity families of kings have been unable to oppose Jarāsandha he has already brought eighty six kings to the house of Paśupati when he has fourteen more he will offer them as sacrifices . Some further objections of Yudhiṣṭhira are refuted by Arjuna . The origin of Jarāsandha was the following The Magadha king Bṛhadratha, who had three akṣauhiṇīs of troops, married the two twin daughters of the king of Kāśi, making an engagement never to show a preference for either. As he was childless he repaired to the ṛṣi Caṇḍa Kauśika, the son of Kākṣīvat Gautama, who was sitting under a mango tree. He gave a mango fruit to the king, who gave it to his queens. They then brought forth each one half of a child, which were thrown away, but, found and laid together by the rākṣasī Jarā, became one living child . Jarā had been created by Svayambhū for the destruction of the Dānavas and named Gṛhadevī, and always lived in the kings house and did him good, because there was on the walls a likeness of her endued with youth and in the midst of children, and she was daily worshipped with scents, etc. The king ordered a great festival to be held in Magadha in honour of Jarā, and named the boy Jarāsandha . Some time after Caṇḍa Kauśika again came to Magadha, and foretold the greatness of Jarāsandha, that weapons should not hurt him, and that he should see Rudra. After having installed Jarāsandha, Bṛhadratha with his two wives retired to the woods and, after practising ascetic penances, ascended to heaven. When king Kaṃsa was slain by Vāsudeva, Jarāsandha, from Girivraja, whirling a mace ninety nine times, hurled it towards Mathurā, where Kṛṣṇa was residing at that time the mace fell at Gadāvasāna, near Mathurā, at a distance of ninety nine yojanas . He, with Haṃsa and Ḍimbhaka, were more than a match for the three worlds therefore, from policy, the Kukuras, Andhakas, and Vṛṣṇis, chose not to fight with him .
Rājasūyasya ārambha .
Rājasūyika parva .
. Under Yudhiṣṭhiras rule the people were very happy, and great riches filled the treasury. Then Yudhiṣṭhira resolved upon the celebration of the rājasūya. Kṛṣṇa came there, having appointed Ānakadundubhi to the command of the army. Then Yudhiṣṭhira, sitting with Dhaumya, Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana, his brothers, etc asked Kṛṣṇa to install himself in that sacrifice or to permit the Pāṇḍavas to be installed in it. Kṛṣṇa said that Yudhiṣṭhira ought to perform it and employ himself in some office. Then Yudhiṣṭhira caused his minister Sahadeva to get the articles together that Dhaumya might order as required for the sacrifice, and to let Indrasena and Viśoka and Puru, with Arjuna for his charioteer, engage in collecting food. Dvaipāyana himself became the brahman and appointed learned brahmans as ṛtvijes Susāman became the sāmaga, Yājñavalkya the adhvaryu, Paila the hotṛ accompanied by Dhaumya, and their disciples and sons the hotragas who uttered benedictions, etc. Then Yudhiṣṭhira caused Sahadeva to dispatch messengers, who invited men of the four castes. Then the brahmans installed Yudhiṣṭhira in the rājasūya sacrifice, the guests arrived, the artificers erected habitations, etc. Then Yudhiṣṭhira despatched Nakula to Hāstinapura in order to fetch Bhīṣma and Droṇa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Vidura, Kṛpa, etc. . Enumeration of kings who came to Yudhiṣṭhiras rājasūya . Yudhiṣṭhira saluted Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana, etc and appointed Duḥśāsana to attend to the food, etc Aśvatthāman to the brahmans, Sañjaya to the kings, Bhīṣma and Droṇa to see what was e and what left une, Kṛpa to attend to the diamonds, etc and the dakṣiṇās Vidura became the disburser, Duryodhana the receiver of the tributes, Kṛṣṇa washed the feet of the brahmans. Yudhiṣṭhira performed the sacrifice with six fires . Then the sacrifice was completed, watched by Kṛṣṇa. When the kings departed, the Pāṇḍavas, com manded by Yudhiṣṭhira, followed them to the confines of his inions, one after another . Kṛṣṇa asked leave to go to Dvārakā, being thanked by Yudhiṣṭhira for his co operation, and having bidden farewell to Pṛthā, etc and having performed his ablutions, etc he walked round the Garuḍa bannered chariot, which Dāruka had fetched, and ascending it set out for Dvāravatī, followed on foot by the Pāṇḍavas, till they took leave. Now Duryodhana alone, with king Subalas son Śakuni, remained in the assembly house .
Rāji, a prince .
Rājñām āgamana .
Rājoparicara = Vasu Uparicara, .
Rājyalābha . Rājyalambha.
. The Pāṇḍavas with Kuntī and Kṛṣṇā journeyed towards Hāstina pura. Dhṛtarāṣṭra despatched Vikarṇa, Citrasena, Droṇa, and Kṛpa to receive them. The inhabitants were filled with joy. In order to prevent any difference between them and their cousins, Dhṛtarāṣṭra caused them, with Kṛṣṇa in the van, to repair to Khāṇḍavaprastha, taking half the king. With Dvaipāyanas assistance they measured out a piece of land for their city, which was very beautiful, and came to be called Indraprastha. Having settled the Pāṇḍavas there, Kṛṣṇa came back with Rāma to Dvāravatī . When the Pāṇḍavas were dwelling in happiness at Khāṇḍavaprastha, one day the Devarṣi Nārada came to them, and recommended them to make an arrangement so that disunion might not arise among them for the sake of their common wife, mentioning how Sunda and Upasunda had killed each other for the sake of Tilottamā. Yudhiṣṭhira asked who those Asuras were, and who this Tilottamā was . Sunasunākhyāna . The arrangement the Pāṇḍavas made was, that if one of them should be sitting with Draupadī, and one of the other ones should happen to see it, he would have to retire into the forest for twelve years and live as a brahmacārin. Then Nārada went away .
Rājyalambha = Rājyalābha .
Rākā, a female Rākṣasa .
Rākā . u, .
Rakṣaṇa = Viṣṇu .
Rakṣas, pl a kind of being = Rākṣasa, pl . Do sg . Names of single Rakṣases Alambuṣa, . Alāyudha, . Baka, . Cārvāka, . Dhūmrākṣa, . Ghaṭotkaca, . Hiḍimba, . Jaṭāsura, . Kiṅkara, . Kirmīra, . Lavaṇa, . Maṇimat, . Mārīca, . Ogha, . Puloman, . Rāvaṇa, . Vajravega, .
Rākṣasa, pl a class of beings = Rakṣas, pl . Brahmarākṣasa, pl. Do sg . Names of single Rākṣasas Alambuṣa, . Alāyudha, . Baka, . Cārvāka, . Daṃśa, . Dhūmrākṣa, . Ghaṭotkaca, . Hidimba, . Indrajit, . Jaṭāsura, . Kalmāṣapāda, . Kiṅkara, . Kirmīra, . Maṇimat, . Mārīca, . Mūka, . Prahasta, . Rāvaṇa, . Virūpākṣa, .
Rākṣasa, adj. .
Rākṣasaśreṣṭha1 = Alambuṣa, .
Rākṣasaśreṣṭha2 = Rāvaṇa, .
Rākṣasādhipa1 = Ghaṭotkaca, .
Rākṣasādhipa2 = Rāvaṇa, .
Rākṣasādhipa3 = Virūpākṣa, .
Rākṣasādhipati1 = Kubera, .
Rākṣasādhipati2 = Maṇimat, .
Rākṣasādhipati3 = Rāvaṇa, .
Rākṣasādhipati4 = Virūpākṣa, .
Rākṣasamaheśvara = Rāvaṇa, .
Rākṣasapati = Rāvaṇa, .
Rākṣasapuṅgava1 = Alam buṣa, .
Rākṣasapuṅgava2 = Alāyudha, .
Rākṣasapuṅgava3 = Avindhya, .
Rākṣasapuṅgava4 = Ghaṭotkaca, .
Rākṣasapuṅgava5 = Indrajit, .
Rākṣasapuṅgava6 = Rāvaṇa, .
Rākṣasarāja1 = Baka, .
Rākṣasarāja2 = Rāvaṇa, .
Rākṣaseśvara1 = Ghaṭotkaca, .
Rākṣaseśvara2 = Hiḍimba, .
Rākṣaseśvara3 = Kubera, .
Rākṣaseśvara4 = Rāvaṇa, .
Rākṣaseśvara, dual = Kumbhakarṇa and Rāvaṇa, .
Rākṣasendra1 = Alambuṣa, .
Rākṣasendra2 = Alāyudha, .
Rākṣasendra3 = Ghaṭotkaca, .
Rākṣasendra4 = Hiḍimba, .
Rākṣasendra5 = Kumbhakarṇa, .
Rākṣasendra6 = Rāvaṇa, .
Rākṣasendra7 = Virūpākṣa, .
Rākṣasendra8, mostly pl .
Rākṣasī, pl .
Rākṣasī, sg . Names of single Rākṣasīs Śūrpanakhā, . Dīrghajihvā, . Hiḍimbā, . Jarā, . Trijaṭā, .
Rakṣitā, an Apsaras .
Rakṣovaha, pl a people .
Rakta, Raktamālyāmbaradhara = Śiva. .
Raktāṅga1, a serpent .
Raktāṅga2 = Śiva .
Raktavirakta = Śiva .
Rāma1, son of Jamadagni and Reṇukā, otherwise called Paraśu Rāma, which name, however, s not occur in the text of the Mhbhr. generally he is only named Rāma passages where he is mentioned only by synonyms are put within square brackets note the following abbreviations Bh. = Bhārgava, J. = Jāmadagnya . b, . Bhīṣma told Satyavatī When Rāma Jāmadagnya, angry at the slaughter of his father, had slain with his battle axe the Haihaya king Arjuna, he exterminated the kṣatriyas twenty one times, but the kṣatriya race was restored by the kṣatriya ladies, cohabiting with the brahmans, . . c, . For the destruction of Rāvaṇa Viṣṇu corporeally took his birth as the son of king Daśaratha. saw him in Ayodhyā when he had been born. Then Rāma Bhārgava, the son of Ṛcīka and the son of Reṇūkā, went to Ayodhyā with his bow with which he had destroyed the kṣatriyas, to see Rāma Dāśarathi. Daśaratha sent Rāma to receive him. Rāma Dāśarathi stringed Rāma Bhārgavas bow without exertion and enabled him to see him in his true form and to behold, in his body, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Sādhyas, the gaṇas of the Maruts, the Pitṛs, Hutāśana, the nakṣatras and planets, the Gandharvas, the Rākṣasas, the Yakṣas, the rivers and tīrthas, the eternal ṛṣis named Vālakhilyas, who had become identical with Brahmán, the Devarṣis, the seas and mountains, the Vedas with the Upaniṣads, the vaṣaṭkāras, and the sacrifices, the Sāmans in their living form, the Dhanurveda, the clouds, rains, and lightnings then he shot a celestial shaft presented to him by Rāma Bhārgava at this the earth was filled with sounds of thunder, etc and began to quake. Rāma Bhārgava was for a time deprived of his senses, and the shaft came blazing back into Rāma Dāśarathis hands. Rāma Bhārgava proceeded to the Mahendra mountain, where he dwelt in terror and shame till after a year his pitṛs, beholding him deprived of energy, caused him to bathe in the sacred river Vadhūsara, especially in the tīrtha Dīptoda, where Bhṛgu had practised austerities in the devayuga by this R. regained his energy, . After having lamented and cremated his father, R. vowed to slay the entire kṣatriya caste, he then killed the sons of Arjuna Kārtavīrya, and the kṣatriyas who followed them, and twenty one times he made the earth devoid of kṣatriyas then he made five lakes of blood in Samantapañcaka, where he offered libations to the Bhṛgus, and Ṛcīka appeared to him and gave him advice. At a sacrifice R. satisfied Indra and gave the earth to the ṛtvijes, and a golden altar, vyāmas in breadth and in height, to Kaśyapa, which Kaśyapa allowed the brahmans to divide in shares . After having given the earth to Kaśyapa. R. dwelt on the Mahendra mountain, bis, . b, . also Rāma Jāmadagnya will die without being satiated. The calf having been stolen and his father slain by the kṣatriyas he slew the invincible Kārtavīrya. With his bow he slew, kṣatriyas, among them, brahman hating kṣatriyas, and Dantakrūra of the Haihayas he slew, with his club, with his sword, by hanging, etc. he proceeded against the Kāśmīras, etc and slew them all bringing all the eighteen dvīpas of the earth under his subjection, he performed sacrifices, his sacrificial altar and the earth he gave as dakṣiṇā to Kaśyapa, etc. having divested the earth of kṣatriyas for twenty one times, he gave the earth to the brahmans, and it was Kaśyapa who accepted it with its seven dvīpas. Then Kaśyapa told R. to go out of the earth R. with his arrows caused the ocean to stand aside, and repairing to the Mahendra mountain he continued to live there, . b, . b In the race of the Bhṛgus was Jamadagni. His son Rāma by ascetic penances gratified Bhava in order to obtain weapons Śiva showed himself to him and promised him all weapons when he would become pure those weapons burn a person who is not deserving of them. With penances, etc and homa performed with mantras Rāma aed Śiva for many years. Gratified with him Śiva repeatedly proclaimed his virtues in the presence of . and Ṛ. Meanwhile the Daityas became very mighty and afflicted the gods, who, having failed to vanquish them, repaired to Śiva. Śiva summoned Rāma and prevailed upon him to slay the Dānavas. Then touched by Śiva, his wounds were immediately healed, and Śiva gave him all the celestial weapons and granted him boons, . cc, . b, . . b, . b, . g, . b, . c, . b, . b, . c, . d Having slain Arjuna Kārtavīrya and destroyed his troops he afterwards repeatedly destroyed the kṣatriyas begotten by brahmans upon kṣatriya women, who had lost their children, twenty one times. Then a bodiless voice from heaven which was heard by all people told him to desist, and as he refused, being unable to forgive the slaughter of his father, his Pitṛs told him the old story of king Alarka and caused him to practise penances, by which he attained to high success, .
Rāma2 Dāśarathi, king of Ayodhyā, son of Daśaratha and husband of Sītā bis . R of countless virtues, the elder brother of Lakṣmaṇa, lived for fourteen years in the woods together with his wife, at the command of his father in order to protect the ascetics he at Janasthāna slew, Rā. Rāvaṇa ravished his wife, the princess of Videha R. slew him with all his kinsmen and followers. . and Ṛ. applauded R. he performed horse sacrifices, etc. when R. ruled his king, Ṛ and men lived together on earth, nobody died in youth, etc men were each blessed with, children and lived for, years R. reigned, years and then went to heaven, having established his line in eight dynasties, . b, . b, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms Ayodhyādhipati, . Daśarathasya putra, . Daśarathātmaja, . Dāśarathi, . Ikṣvākunandana, Kākutstha, Kausalyā nandivardhana, Kausalyāmātṛ, Kosalendra, Lakṣmaṇāgraja, Rāghava, q.v.
Rāma3, .
Rāma4 = Viṣṇu .
Rāmacarita .
Rāmahrada1, pl. . The R. had been dug by Rāma Jāmadagnya and filled with the blood of the kṣatriyas in order to gratify his father and forefathers, who therefore granted him the boon that his ascetic merit should again be increased, that he should be freed from his sin of having exterminated the kṣatriya race, and that his lakes should be tīrthas celebrated over the world. Then they disappeared. To him who bathing there offers oblations to the Pitṛs, they will grant his desires and eternal heaven, etc . kk, . Do sg . v By bathing in the R. and offering water to the Pitṛs in the Vipāśā one is cleansed from his sins. By bathing in the Mahāhrada one attains to the end of Jamadagni, etc .
Rāmaka, a mountain .
Ramaṇa1 .
Ramaṇa2, pl a people .
Ramaṇaka, name of a varṣa. i On the south of Śveta and the north of Niṣadha is the varṣa Ramaṇaka. The men there are white, of good parentage and handsome, without enemies, living for, years, ever cheerful, .
Ramānātha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Rāmaṇīyaka, name of an island . Description of R. by Viśva karman it had been made the abode of the makaras, there the serpents first saw the terrible Lavaṇa it is aned with many trees which grow only on the hills of Malaya, and is dear to the Gandharvas .
Rāmānuja1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Rāmānuja2 = Lakṣmaṇa, .
Rāmaābhiṣeka . Having slain Rāvaṇa, Rāma was worshipped by Ṛ and G. uttering jaya he gave Laṅkā to Vibhīṣaṇa, Avindhya came with Sītā, whom Rāma repudiated. Lakṣ maṇa and the monkeys were sorrowful Brahmán appeared on his chariot, etc. Sītā swore by Mātariśvan, etc that she was innocent. A celestial voice was heard, Vāyu, etc. attested her innocence. Brahmán said that it was by his grace that Rāvaṇa had been unslayable but Sītā had been protected by the curse of Nalakūbara. Daśaratha commanded him to take back his wife and rule his king at Ayodhyā, his exile of fourteen years was over. Rāma gave boons to Avindhya and Trijaṭā. Brahmán and the gods, headed by Indra, granted Rāma adherence to virtue and invincibility, and the monkeys were restored to life. Sītā granted to Hanūmat, that his life might last as long as the fame of Rāma, and gave him celestial wines and drinks. Mātali said Thou hast dispelled the sorrows of G Y As N and men, and therefore all creatures with As G Y Rā and Pn. will always speak of thee. Having made arrangements for the protection of Laṅkā, Rāma, etc. recrossed the bridge riding on Puṣpaka, at the seashore he dismissed the monkeys with presents, then he re entered Kiṣkindhyā, where he installed Aṅgada as yuvarāja. Having reached Ayodhyā he dispatched Hanūmat as envoy to Bharata. Then he entered Nandigrāma and saw Bharata and Śatrughna, Bharata made the king over to him. Vasiṣṭha and Vāmadeva installed him in the sovereignty under the nakṣatra which belongs to Viṣṇu . Then he dismissed Sugrīva, Vibhīṣaṇa, etc and gave Puṣpaka back to Kubera. He then performed ten jārūthya horse sacrifices on the Gomatī .
Rāma Rāvaṇa yuddha . Headed by Rāvaṇa many small Rākṣasas and Piśācas, viz. Parvaṇa, etc invisible penetrated among the monkeys. Vibhīṣaṇa broke the spell of their invisibility, and they were all slain. Rāvaṇa with the Rākṣasas and Piśācas formed the array named after Uśanas . Rāma disposed his troops after the rule of Bṛhaspati . Rāvaṇa fought with Rāma, etc then an encounter came about with celestial weapons of great force .
Ramaṭa, pl v. Rāmaṭha, pl.
Ramaṭha, pl. . next.
Rāmaṭha, pl a people .
Rāmatīrtha, name of several tīrthas . cc Rāma Bhārgava having repeatedly subjugated the earth and slain all the foremost of kṣatriyas in that tīrtha performed a vājapeya and horse sacrifices through the assistance of his preceptor the muni Kaśyapa whom he gave as sacrificial fee the earth with the oceans. Having duly bathed there and made presents to the brahmans, etc Rāma retired into the woods, .
Rāmāyaṇa, the well known work of Vālmīki . c, . Cf Rāmacarita.
Rāmāyaṇa upākhyāna . Rāmopākhyāna1.
Rambhā, an Apsaras . b, .
Rambhā, .
Raṃhas = Śiva, .
Rāmopākhyāna1 . Rāmāyaṇa upākhyāna.
Rāmopākhyāna2 . b Jahnu Aja Balākāśva Kuśika, who performed penances in order to get a son Indra became his son Gādhi. Bhṛgu. Viśvāmitra. SatyavatīṚcīka. Jamadagni. Paraśu Rāma. Ṛcīka destined a certain portion of the sacrificial food for Satyavatī, which would give her a son of great wis, the foremost of brahmans and another for her mother, which would give her for a son an invincible kṣatriya. Then Ṛcīka proceeded to the woods to practise penances. King Gādhi, on a tīrtha yātrā, arrived at Ṛcīkas retreat with his queen. There the mother of Satyavatī, from ignorance, exchanged the two portions of the food. Ṛcīka predicted that the son of Satyavatī would become a terrible kṣatriya, but asked by Satyavatī, he granted that not her son but her grandson would become such her mother would give birth to a brahman . Besides the other sciences, Rāma mastered the Dhanurveda gratifying Mahādeva on Gandhamādana, he asked him for weapons, especially the axe, which made him unrivalled on earth. Meanwhile the virtuous kṣatriya, the Haihaya king Arjuna Kārtavīrya, who had got, arms through the grace of Dattātreya, having subjugated the whole earth with its mountains and seven islands, became a powerful emperor, and gave away the earth to the brahmans at a horse sacrifice. Once, solicited by Agni, he gave alms to that deity springing from the points of his shafts, Agni burnt villages, etc and also the retreat of Āpava, who cursed Arjuna, saying that Rāma should lop off his arms. Arjuna, always devoted to peace, always regardful of brahmans, etc did not think of that curse. His sons, always haughty and cruel, seized and brought away the calf of Jamadagnis homa cow, without the knowledge of Arjuna Rāma lopped off the arms of Arjuna and brought back the calf the sons of Arjuna came and slew Jamadagni, in the absence of Rāma, who vowed to free the earth of kṣatriyas, and slaughtered all the sons and grandsons of Arjuna, and thousands of Haihayas, and annihilated all kṣatriyas, and then, filled with compassion, retired into the woods. After some thousands of years, the grandson of Viśvāmitra and son of Raibhya, Parāvasu said to Rāma in public were not Pratardana, etc who were assembled at a sacrifice at the time of Yayātis fall, kṣatriyas by birth thou art not true of thy vow through fear of kṣatriya heroes thou hast betaken thyself to the mountains. Rāma once more slew kṣatriyas by hundreds. Those kṣatriyas, how ever, that he spared, counted by hundreds, multiplied and became mighty monarchs on earth. Rāma once more slaughtered them, not sparing the very children. Some kṣatriya ladies, however, succeeded in protecting their children. Having made the earth destitute of kṣatriyas twenty one times, Rāma, at the completion of a horse sacrifice, gave away the earth as a sacrificial present to Kaśyapa. In order to preserve the remnant of the kṣatriyas, Kaśyapa told Rāma to repair to the shores of the southern ocean and not to reside within his inion. The ocean suddenly created Śūrpāraka for Rāma. Kaśyapa gave the earth to the brahmans and then entered the great forest. Then śūdras and vaiśyas began to cohabit with the wives of brahmans unprotected duly by kṣatriyas, the earth quickly sank, and was held by Kaśyapa on his lap, whence she was called Urvī. For protections sake she asked Kaśyapa for a king, saying that she had concealed some Haihaya kṣatriyas among women Paurava, brought up among bears in the Ṛkṣavat mountain a son of Saudāsa, protected through compassion by Parāśara, and named Sarvakarman Śibis son Gopati, brought up in the forest among kine Pratardanas son Vatsa, brought up among calves in a cow pen Dadhivāhanas grandson and Divirathas son, concealed on the banks of Gaṅgā by Gautama Bṛhadratha, protected by apes on Gṛdhrakūṭa many kṣatriyas belonging to the race of Marutta have been brought up by the ocean they are living among artisans and goldsmiths their fathers and grandfathers have been slain for my sake by Rāma it is my duty to see that their funeral rites are duly performed. Kaśyapa, seeking out those kṣatriyas, installed them duly as kings in days of yore. Those kṣatriya races that are now extant are the progeny of those princes.
Rāmopākhyānaparvan . As Yudhiṣṭhira asked Mārkaṇḍeya if he knew any one more unfortunate than he was, Mārkaṇḍeya related the story of Rāma Dāśarathi King Aja of Ikṣvākus race had a son Daśaratha, who had four virtuous sons Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa and Śatrughna, and Bharata . Sītā, the daughter of the Videha king Janaka, was created by Tvaṣṭṛ himself to become the wife of Rāma. Prajāpati had a mind born son Pulastya, who with a cow begat a son Vaiśravaṇa . Leaving his father, Vaiśravaṇa went to his grandfather, and angered at this, his father with half of his own self became born as Viśravas for wreaking vengeance on Vaiśravaṇa. But Pitāmaha, pleased with Vaiśravaṇa, gave him immortality and made him the sovereign of wealth, a lokapāla and friend of Īśāna, and gave him a son Nalakūbara, and Laṅkā for his capital, guarded by hosts of Rākṣasas, and the vimāna Puṣpaka capable of going everywhere, and the kingship of the Yakṣas, etc. . The muni Viśravas was greatly enraged against Vaiśravaṇa. Kubera, the king of the Rākṣasas, always sought to please his father, and, living in Laṅkā, sent three Rākṣasa women skilled in singing and dancing to wait upon him. Pulastya granted them boons to Puṣpotkaṭā two sons Kumbhakarṇa and Daśa grīva Mālinī bore one son, Vibhīṣaṇa Rākā became the mother of the twins Khara and Śūrpaṇakhā. Vibhīṣaṇa surpassed everybody in beauty and was very pious Daśagrīva was energetic and strong Kumbhakarṇa was the most powerful in battle and a master of illusion Khara was proficient in archery and hostile to brahmans Śūrpaṇakhā troubled the ascetics . Learned in the Vedas, they lived with their father on Gandhamādana. And there they beheld Vaiśravaṇa seated with their father, and seized with jealousy, they gratified Brahmán with severe penances, while Khara and Śūrpaṇakhā protected and attended on them. After, years Daśagrīva, cutting off his head, offered it in the fire, and Brahmán appeared and made them desist from their austerities, granting them boons except immortality. Now Daśagrīva defeated Kubera in battle and drove him from Laṅkā Kubera then, followed by Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, and Kinnaras, went to live on Gandhamādana. Rāvaṇa took from him Puṣpaka, upon which Vaiśravaṇa cursed him saying This chariot shall never carry thee, but him who will slay thee in battle, and as thou hast insulted thy elder brother thou shalt soon die. Vibhīṣaṇa followed Kubera, who invested him with the command of the Yakṣa and Rākṣasa hosts. On the other hand, the man eating Rākṣasas and Piśācas anointed Daśagrīva as their sovereign. Daśagrīva deprived the gods and Daityas of their valuable possessions, and because he terrified all creatures, he was called Rāvaṇa . The Brahmarṣis, Siddhas, and Devarṣis, with Agni as their spokesman, sought the protection of Brahmán, who said that the four armed Viṣṇu had already been incarnate for this object, and caused Indra and the gods, Gandharvas, and Dānavas to beget strong sons, capable of assuming any form at will, on monkeys and bears and the Gandharvī Dundubhī he caused to be born on earth as the hunch backed Mantharā, who, instructed by Brahmán, went hither and thither ever engaged in fomenting quarrels . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Mārkaṇḍeya related The sons of Daśaratha were conversant with the Vedas and the Dhanurveda. Rāma equalled Indra and Bṛhaspati. At night, the Puṣya being in a lucky conjuncture, Rāma was to be invested as yuvarāja. Mantharā aroused the jealousy of Kaikeyī against Kausalyā, Kaikeyī prevailed upon Daśaratha that Bharata should be anointed and Rāma be in exile in the forest of Daṇḍaka for fourteen years. Rāma was accompanied by Lakṣmaṇa and Sītā. Daśaratha died. Bharata rebuked Kaikeyī and set off to find Rāma, accompanied by Kausalyā, Sumitrā, Kaikeyī, Śatrughna, Vasiṣṭha, Vāmadeva, etc. He saw Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa on the mountain Citrakūṭa, but Rāma would adhere to the order of his father. Bharata then ruled in Nandi grāma, keeping before him the shoes of Rāma. Rāvaṇagamana . Sītāharaṇa . Viśvāvasumokṣaṇa . Having bathed in the lake Pampā, Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa on the mountain Ṛṣya mūka beheld the monkey king Sugrīva and his four counsellors, Hanūmat, etc. Sugrīva showed Rāma a piece of cloth that had been dropped by Sītā. Sugrīva promised to bring back Sītā. Rāma installed Sugrīva as king of all the monkeys and promised to slay Vālin. Then they all repaired to Kiṣkindhyā. Vālin came out Tārā told him that it was Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, Ṃainda, Dvivida, Hanūmat, Jāmbavat, and Sugrīva who had come to destroy him. Vālin suspected Tārā. Near the mountain Mālyavat he had an encounter with Sugrīva. Hanūmat placed a garland round Sugrīvas neck, and Rāma recognized Sugrīva by that sign and killed Vālin with an arrow. Sugrīva thus regained Kiṣkindhyā and Tārā. Rāma dwelt on Mālyavat for four months. Sītāsāntvana . Sītā Rāvaṇasaṃvāda . Hanūmat pratyāgamana . Setubandhana . Laṅkāpraveśa . Rāma Rāvaṇayuddha . Kumbhakarṇaraṇagamana . Kumbha karṇādivadha . Indrajidyuddha . Indrajidvadha . Rāvaṇavadha . Rāmābhiṣeka . Yudhiṣṭhirāśvāsa .
Ramyagrāma, name of a city .
Raṇapriya = Viṣṇu .
Raṇeṣv agnimukha = Śiva .
Raṇotkaṭa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Rantideva, an ancient king, son of Saṅkṛti . R. Sāṅkṛti had, cooks to distribute food to the brahmans, etc. countless numbers of animals desirous of going to heaven used to come to him of their own accord the number of animals sacrificed in his agnihotras was so large that the secretions from the heaps of skins formed a veritable river, which came to be called Carmaṇvatī even when he had on a single day given away to the brahmans a crore of niṣkas he thought he had given away very little, etc etc. People who are acquainted with ancient history quote gāthās regarding R . b, . c King R when divested of all his wealth, gave a small quantity of water with a pure heart, by this gift he went to heaven, . Sāṅkṛti, Sāṇkṛtya.
Rasa .
Rasā = Rasātala, .
Rasāhara .
Rasātala, the nether world. c, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, .
Ratā, wife of Prajāpati2 and mother of the Vasu Ahar .
Rathacakrabhṛt = Viṣṇu, .
Rathacitrā, a river .
Rathādhvana = Kumbharetas, .
Rathākṣa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Rathāṅgapāṇī = Viṣṇu .
Rathantara1, name of a sāman . b, . b, . g, . o, . b, . b, .
Rathantara2, name of a fire .
Rathantarī, wife of Īlina .
Rathaprabhu = Kumbharetas, .
Rathasena, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Rathasthā, a river. b, .
Rathātirathasaṅkhyā . next.
Rathātirathasaṅkhyāna .
. When Bhīṣma had obtained the command, he said to Duryodhana that he would command worshipping Kumāra. He said that he was as well versed in military affairs as Bṛhaspati, etc. At the request of Duryodhana he enumerated the principal rathas and atirathas in Duryodhanas army continuation continuation Karṇa he considered only half a ratha, at which Karṇa was enraged, and said he would not fight before Bhīṣma was slain. Bhīṣma rebuked him, but was pacified by Duryodhana . At the request of Duryodhana, Bhīṣma enumerated the rathas and atirathas of the Pāṇḍavas . Continuation . Continuation . Continuation. Bhīṣma would not slay Śikhaṇḍin, for Śikhaṇḍin was formerly a woman nor would he be able to slay the sons of Kuntī .
Rathavāhana, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Rathāvarta, name of a tīrtha .
Rathayogin = Śiva .
Rathin, an ancient king .
Rathyavirathya = Śiva .
Rati1, a goddess, wife of Kāma .
Rati2, an Apsaras. b, .
Rati3 = Śiva .
Ratiguṇa, a Devagandharva .
Ratnagarbha, Ratnanābha = Viṣṇu .
Ratnaprabhūta = Śiva .
Rātri . u, . Niśā.
Raudra1 = Skanda, .
Raudra2 = Aśvatthāman, .
Raudra3 = Śiva, .
Raudra4, son of Śukra .
Raudra5, adj. . c, . d, . d, . u, . b, . d, .
Raudra, pl name of a people . Audra, pl.
Raudrāśva, a prince .
Raudrakarman, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Raudrarūpa = Śiva .
Raudrāstra . Raudra, adj.
Rauhiṇeya = Balarāma, .
Rauhiṇinandana, v. Rohiṇinandana.
Raukmiṇeya = Pradyumna, q.v.
Raumya, pl a class of beings. b, .
Raupyā, name of a river .
Raurava, name of a hell .
Rāvaṇa, king of the Rākṣasas on Laṅkā, son of Viśravas . b, . also the following synonyms Daśagrīva, . Daśakandhara, . Daśānana, . Daśāsya, . Paulastya, Paulastyatanaya, q.v. Rakṣaḥpati, . Rakṣas, Rākṣasa, Rākṣasādhipa, Rāk ṣasādhipati, Rākṣasaśreṣṭha, Rākṣasa maheśvara, Rākṣasapati, Rākṣasapuṅgava, Rākṣasarāja, Rākṣaseśvara, Rākṣasendra, q.v.
Rāvaṇagamana . Fearing intrusion by the people of Ayodhyā, Rāma Dāśarathi went away to the wood and visited the hermitage of Śara bhaṅga then he entered the forest of Daṇḍaka on the river Godāvarī, where he, on account of Śūrpaṇakhā, had hostilities with Khara, and then dwelling in Janasthāna slew, Rākṣasas together with Khara and Dūṣaṇa. Śūrpaṇakhā with mutilated nose and lips repaired to Rāvaṇa on Laṅkā. Rāvaṇa crossed the Trikūṭa and Kāla mountains and arrived at Gokarṇa where he met Mārīca .
Ravaṇātmaja = Indrajit, .
Rāvaṇavadha . Rāvaṇa with the Rākṣasas rushed towards Rāma and the monkeys Rāvaṇa from his body created thousands of Rākṣasas, whom Rāma slew with a celestial weapon. Then Rāvaṇa produced Rākṣasas, resembling Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, whom Rāma slew. Mātali came with the chariot of Indra, Rāma thought it to be an illusion, but was reassured by Vibhīṣaṇa, and riding in that chariot he killed Rāvaṇa with an arrow which he had consecrated with mantras as a Brahmāstra. The gods, the Gandharvas, Indra, the Dānavas, the Kinnaras, and the Cāraṇas rejoiced .
Rāvaṇi = Indrajit, .
Ravi1 = Sūrya, .
Ravi2, one of the standard bearers of Jayadratha .
Ravi3, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Ravi4 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Ravilocana = Viṣṇu .
Ravisūnu = Karṇa, q.v.
Ravitanaya = Karṇa, .
Recaka, pl a people .
Reṇuka1, a Nāga .
Reṇuka2, name of an elephant .
Reṇukā, wife of Jamadagni . b, .
Reṇukāsuta = Rāma Jāmadagnya, .
Reṇukātīrtha, name of a tīrtha . next.
Reṇukāyās tīrtha, name of a tīrtha the prec.
Reṇupa, pl a people .
Revata1, a mountain in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Revata2, an ancient king .
Revata3, adj v. Raivata.
Revatī, wife of Balarāma .
Revatī, name of a demon of disease .
Revatī, name of a nakṣatra . b, .
Revatīsuta = Skanda, .
Riṣṭa, an ancient king .
Rocamāna1, name of several princes .
Rocamāna2, dual .
Rocamānā, a mātṛ. u, .
Rocanāmukha, a Daitya .
Rohī, a river .
Rohiṇeya, v. Rauhiṇeya.
Rohiṇī .
Rohiṇī, daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Soma, also name of a nakṣatra . b, Ānuśāsanik.results of making gifts under the constellation of R.result of performing śrāddhas under the constellation of R.description of the cāndravratayadā yujyeta RīUmā Maheśvarasaṃv.Śaśinaḥ sādhvī
Rohiṇī, wife of Vasudeva .
Rohiṇī, daughter of Hiraṇyakaśipu .
Rohiṇinandana = Balarāma, .
Rohiṇīsuta = Balarāma, .
Rohita1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Rohitaka, name of a country .
Rohitaka, pl a people .
Rohitakāraṇya, name of a forest .
Romaśa, pl a people .
Romaharṣa = Lomaharṣaṇa .
Romaka, pl a people .
Roman, pl a people .
Roṣa .
Ruci1, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Ruci2, an Apsaras. b, .
Ruci3, wife of Devaśarman. b, .
Ruciparvan, a Pāṇḍava warrior, son of Kṛti .
Ruciprabha, a Daitya. b, .
Rucirāṅgada = Viṣṇu .
Rudra, pl a class of gods, followers of Śiva . bis, . b, . c, . u, . ff, . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . b, . f, . b, .
Rudra2 = Śiva, q.v. Do. = Sūrya, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Rudragarbha = Agni, q.v.
Rudraja = Aśvatthāman, .
Rudrakoṭi, name of two tīrthas .
Rudraloka .
Rudramārga, name of a tīrtha .
Rudra pada, name of a tīrtha .
Rudrāṇī = Umā, q.v.
Rudrapatnī = Umā, .
Rudraromā, a mātṛ. u, .
Rudrasena, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Rudrāstra .
Rudrasūnu = Skanda, .
Rudrasya tīrthaṃ .
Rudrātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Rudrāvarta, name of a tīrtha .
Rudravaṭa, name of a tīrtha .
Rukma, a prince . the foll.
Rukmāṅgada, a prince .
Rukmaratha1, son of Śalya .
Rukmaratha2 = Droṇa, . Do. = Suśarman, . Do. = Virāṭa, .
Rukmaratha, pl a host of Kuru warriors .
Rukmavāhana = Droṇa, .
Rukmin, king of Bhojakaṭa, son of Bhīṣmaka, and brother of Rukmiṇī . b, . g, . d R. was a disciple of Druma, that lion among the Kimpuruṣas on the mountain of Gandhamādana. He had obtained from his preceptor the whole fourfold Dhanurveda and the celestial bow Vijaya, belonging to the great Indra, and equal to the Gāṇḍīva and the Śārṅga . When he obtained Vijaya from Druma, R. came to the Pāṇḍavas. Formerly when Kṛṣṇa had ravished his sister Rukmiṇī, he set out in pursuit having sworn that he would not return without having slain Kṛṣṇa. But he was vanquished and did not return to Kuṇḍina on the spot where he was vanquished he built the city of Bhojakaṭa, .
Rukmiṇī, sister of Rukmin, wife of Kṛṣṇa, and mother of Pradyumna, etc . c, . d, . b, . c, . Bhīṣmakāt majā, Bhojyā.
Rukmiṇinandana = Pradyumna, q.v.
Rumaṇvat, son of Jamadagni .
Ruṇā, a river .
Rūpa .
Rūpavāhika, pl a people .
Rūpina, son of Ajamīḍha and Keśinī .
Ruru, a brahman . b, . Bhṛgunandana.
Ruṣadgu, v. Vṛṣadgu.
Ruṣaṅgu, a brahman. l R. was an old brahman always devoted to ascetic penances. Resolved to give up his body he told his sons to take him to Pṛthūdaka on the Sarasvatī . There R. bathed according to due rites and then said to his sons He who would aban his body in Pṛthūdaka on the northern bank of the Sarasvatī while employed in mentally reciting sacred mantras would never again be afflicted with death, .
Ruṣardika, a king .
Ṛbhu, pl a class of gods .
ṛc, mostly pl . Ṛgveda. Do pl. = Śiva .
Ṛceyu, a prince . Ṛkṣa2.
Ṛcīka1, a form or son of Vivasvat .
Ṛcīka2, a ṛṣi, son or descendant of Bhṛgu, and father of Jamadagni and Śunaḥśepha . b, . b, . c, . d, . Bhārgava, Bhārgavarṣabha, Bhṛguśārdūla, Bhṛgunandana, Bhṛguputra, Bhṛgusattama, Bhṛgusuta, Brahmarṣi, Viprarṣi.
Ṛcīka3, son of Bhūmanyu .
Ṛcīkanandana, son of Ṛcīka = Rāma Jāma dagnya, .
Ṛcīkaputra = Jamadagni, .
Ṛcīkatanaya1 = Śunaḥśepha, .
Ṛcīkatanaya2 = Jamadagni, .
Ṛśyaśṛṅga, v. Ṛṣyaśṛṅga.
Ṛddha = Viṣṇu .
Ṛddhi, a goddess, wife of Kubera . b, .
Ṛgveda . b, pāṭhapaṭhitaṃ vrataṃVītahavyop.e vartate cāgryā śrutir yasya sc. Gṛtsamadas mahātmanaḥSuvarṇotpattipadakramavibhūsitaḥ
Ṛgyajuḥsāmadhāman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ṛksahasrāmitekṣaṇa = Śiva .
Ṛkṣa1, a prince, son of Ajamīḍha .
Ṛkṣa2, a prince, son of Ariha .
ṛkṣa, pl. .
ṛkṣa, pl. .
Ṛkṣā, wife of Ajamīḍha .
Ṛkṣā, a mātṛ. u, .
Ṛkṣaputra = Saṃvaraṇa, .
Ṛkṣavat, name of a mountain . b, .
Ṛṅmaya = Śiva .
Ṛṣabha1, a serpent .
Ṛṣabha2, one or more ṛṣis . b, .
Ṛṣabha3, name of a certain cannibal .
Ṛṣabha4, a tīrtha .
Ṛṣabha5, one or more mountains .
Ṛṣabha6, an ancient king . b, .
Ṛṣabha7, a prince .
Ṛṣabha8 = Śiva, .
Ṛṣabha9, a dvīpa. i, . next.
Ṛṣabhadvīpa, name of a place .
Ṛṣabhaketu = Śiva, .
Ṛṣabhakūṭa = Hemakūṭa, .
Ṛṣadgu, a prince. b, .
ṛṣayaḥ sapta, v. Saptarṣi, pl.
Ṛṣigiri, name of a mountain .
Ṛṣika, a king .
Ṛṣika, pl a people .
Ṛṣikulyā, pl. and sg name of several sacred waters .
Ṛṣiloka .
Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, a muni, son of Vibhāṇḍaka . d Ṛ the son of Kāśyapa born by a hind, caused Indra to rain during a drought in the territory of Lomapāda, who gave him his daughter Śāntā, . . The viprarṣi Vibhāṇḍaka Kāśyapa practising austerities near a great lake saw the Apsaras Urvaśī, whence his semen fell into the water and was lapped up by a hind, that was drinking. That hind was a daughter of the gods . Brahmán had transformed her into a hind, and when she had given birth to a muni she would be freed. She now gave birth to a son, who was named Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, because there was a horn on his head. He passed his days in the forest, devoted to brahmacarya, and he had never seen any human being except his father. At that time the king of the Aṅgas, Lomāpāda, a friend of Daśaratha, had been shunned by the brahmans and was without a purohita, because he had been guilty of falsehood towards a brahman and therefore Indra did not give rain in his territory. At the advice of a wise brahman he did atonement for his sins and appeased the brahmans. Thereafter he assembled his ministers in order to discuss means for bringing Ṛ. to his land. According to their counsel a courtezan with a number of women, etc was sent to Ṛ. . She had constructed a floating hermitage which she moored at a short distance from Vibhāṇ ḍakas hermitage, and then sent her daughter, a courtezan, to Ṛṣyaśṛṅga. She refused the fruits, foot washing, etc saying that her religious vows consisted in not receiving such things, but implied that she might embrace him. By giving him unsuitable food, garlands, beautiful garments, and drinks, and by playing and clasping him in her arms, she made him overpowered with love, and as she went away under the pretext of performing the agnihotra, he became sad. When Vibhāṇḍaka returned he wondered that Ṛ. was not splitting the logs for fuel, etc and asked who had been there . Ṛ. said that a religious student had come to him he had a mass of hair and a pair of ornaments upon his wrist like his rosary his matted hair was neatly tied up and adhered to the forehead and was divided in two, etc. He wished to go to him and see him every day . Vibhāṇḍaka declared that it was a Rākṣasa, and in vain spent three days in searching for this one. When Vibhāṇḍaka had gone out to collect fruits the courtezans allured Ṛ. to enter the bark, which they unmoored, and in this way they brought him to Lomapāda, who prepared a beautiful forest named Nāvyāśrama and kept Ṛ. in the female apartments. Suddenly rain poured n. Lomapāda gave his daughter Śāntā to Ṛ. When Vibhāṇḍaka was going to Campā in order to burn the king, the city, and his whole territory, the king let kine be placed and fields ploughed along the road, and ordered the cowherds to honour Vibhāṇ ḍaka with hospitality when he was fatigued and hungry, and to say that all this belonged to his son and that they were his slaves. Thus Vibhāṇḍaka was appeased. According to the command of his father Ṛ as soon as a son had been born to him, returned to his father in the wood, and Śāntā followed and obeyed him, as Indrasenā Nārāyaṇī was ever obedient to Mudgala, etc . Kāśyapa, Kāśyapaputra, Kāśyapātmaja.
Ṛṣyamūka, name of a mountain .
Ṛta, name of a Rudra .
Ṛta = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ṛtā = Sarasvatī, .
Ṛtadhāman1 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ṛtasya kartṛ = Skanda, .
Ṛtavaḥ ṣaṭ = Skanda, .
Ṛteyu, a ṛṣi .
Ṛtu1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu . Do.. pl personif . Do pl. = Śiva .
Ṛtuparṇa, king of Ayodhyā . Bhaṅgāsuri, Kosala, Kosalādhipati.
Ṛtusthalā, an Apsaras .
Ṛtvan, v. Satvan.
Sabhā = Sabhāparvan .
Sabhadraka, pl v. Prabhadraka, pl.
Sabhākriyā .
Sabhākriyāparvan . Maya said he was a great artist, the Viśvakarman of the Dānavas, and asked Arjuna to tell him what he was to for him, because he had been rescued by him. Arjuna told him to something for Kṛṣṇa, who asked him to build a palace for Yudhiṣṭhira. Maya was introduced to Yudhiṣṭhira, and recited the history of the Asura, i.e. of Vṛṣaparvan . Then on an auspicious after the initiatory rites, and having gratified thousands of brahmans, he measured out a piece of land, kiṣkus square . Kṛṣṇa departed for Dvārakā . To the north of Kailāsa, near Maināka, there is a huge mountain named Hiraṇyaśṛṅga, consisting of jewels. Near this mountain is situated the lake Bindusaras, where King Bhagīratha had dwelt for many years, desiring to behold the Gaṅgā. There the lord of all beings had performed sacrifices, where, for the sake of embellishment, though not according to rule, the sacrificial stakes were made of gems and the altars of gold. There the, eyed Śacīpati had become perfect by sacrifice. There Bhūtapati took up his abode after having created all the worlds, and there he dwells, worshipped by thousands of spirits . There Nara and Nārāyaṇa, Brahmán, Yama, and Sthāṇu perform their sacrifices at the expiration of, yugas. There Vāsudeva has performed sattras for many years, and placed thousands and tens of thousands of sacrificial stakes aned with golden garlands and altars of great splenr. There Maya, when the Dānavas wished to perform a sacrifice on the bank of the Bindusaras, had made utensils of gems from the house of Vṛṣaparvan. That wealth, which was guarded by Yakṣas and Rākṣasas, he brought away, and thereof constructed the palace of Yudhiṣṭhira. A club with which Vṛṣaparvan had slain all foes in battle, and which had been placed in Bindusaras, Maya gave to Bhīmasena the conch shell Devadatta, that came from Varuṇa, and was also there, he gave to Arjuna at its sound all creatures trembled in awe. The palace surpassed the Sudharmā of Kṛṣṇa and the palace of Brahmán, and covered an area of, kiṣkus square. Eight thousand Rākṣasas, called Kiṅkaras, guarded and supported the palace. In it was a tank, whose lotuses were of dark coloured gems, etc. many kings mistook it for solid ground, and fell into it. The palace was constructed in seventeen months . Enumeration of ṛṣis and kings from various countries, who were present when Yudhiṣṭhira, after having fed, brahmans. etc entered the palace. Also Tamburu, the friend of Dhanañjaya, and the Gandharva Citrasena with his ministers, and many other Gandharvas and Apsarases and Kinnaras came there .
Sabhāparvan, the second of the eighteen great parvans of the Mhbhr . c, . Sabhā.
Sabhāpati1 = Bhūtakarman, .
Sabhāpati2, a Kuru warrior .
Sabhāvana = Śiva .
Sāśva, an ancient king .
Sada, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sadaśva, an ancient king .
Sadaśvormi, an ancient king .
Sadākāntā, a river .
Sadākṣapriya = Śiva .
Sadāmarṣin = Viṣṇu .
Sadānīrā, a river .
Sadānirāmayā, a river .
Sadasadvyaktāvyakta = Mahāpuruṣa .
Sadasatoḥ para = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sadasatpati = Śiva, .
Sadasyormi, v. Sadaśvormi.
Sadāyogin, Sadbhūti = Viṣṇu .
sadbhūtotpādaka, said of the abode of Nārāyaṇa, .
Sadgati, Sādhu = Viṣṇu .
Sādhya, pl a class of gods .
Sādhya = Nārāyaṇa, .
Sādhya, adj. .
Sādhyarṣi = Śiva .
Sadvṛtta = Śiva, .
Sadvṛtti = Devasenā, .
Sādyaska, a sacrifice performed with soma bought on the same .
sadyaskāra, adj .
Sagaṇa = Śiva .
Sagara1, an ancient king of Ayodhyā . At the request of Yudhiṣṭhira, Lomaśa said King S. of the family of the Ikṣvākus had no sons. He subdued the Haihayas and the Tālajaṅgḥas. His wives were Vaidarbhī and Śaibyā. With them he on Kailāsa practised ascetic austerities in order to obtain a son, and practising yoga he succeeded in seeing Śiva, who said that owing to the muhūrta at which S. had addressed his prayers to him, one of the wives of S. would have, sons of exceeding pride, who should perish altogether, and the other wife would have one valorous son, who would perpetuate the race of S. Then Śiva disappeared and S. and his wives went home. Vaidarbhī after some time brought forth a gourd and Śaibyā a beautiful son. As S. was about to throw away the gourd, a voice from the sky told him to take out the seeds and preserve them in steaming vessels partly filled with clarified butter, as they would become, sons . The rājarṣi S. did as he was told, and provided a nurse for every receptacle. When they were born their acts were ruthless, they were able to roam about in the sky and harassed the gods, the Gandharvas, the Rākṣasas, and all beings. The gods, etc went to Brahmán, who dismissed them saying that in a short time the sons of S. would be destroyed. When after some time they were protecting S.s sacrificial horse who roamed over the world, the horse suddenly disappeared when it had come to the waterless sea. Having told S. that the horse had been stolen, they were commanded to search for it, but they did not find it. S. then filled with wrath forbade them to return without the horse. They then began to dig the sea with spades, etc and killed Asuras, Uragas, Rākṣasas, and other beings by hundreds and thousands. After a long time they dug n to Pātāla in the north eastern region, and seeing the horse there they ran after it without heeding Kapila, who was present there. Kapila then burnt them to ashes. Nārada told it to S who sent for Aṃśumat, the son of his son Asamañjas, whom he had abaned according to his duty and for the good of the citizens, . b, Also S. of Ikṣvākus race fell a prey to death. Sixty thousand sons walked behind him. He performed, horse sacrifices and gave precious gifts to the brahmans . Through anger he caused the earth to be excavated, and thus she came to have the ocean on her bosom, for this the ocean has come to be called Sāgara after the name of S . Aikṣvāku.
Sāgara2 = the Ocean, ff. Do pl .
Sāgara3 = Sūrya, .
Sāgara4, v. Sagara.
Sāgara, pl. .
Sāgaradhvaja, v. Sāraṅgadhvaja.
Sāgaragāsuta = Bhīṣma, .
Sāgaraka, pl a people .
Sāgarālaya = Varuṇa, .
Sāgarānūpaka, pl a people .
Sāgarodaka, a tīrtha. c, .
Saha1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra ʹ, .
Saha2, name of a fire father of Adbhuta .
Saha3 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sahā, an Apsaras .
Sahadeva1, Pāṇḍava . S. pro ceeded against the south and vanquished the Śūrasenas, etc then the son of Jambhaka, etc then Bhīṣmaka, etc. Coming to Kiṣkindhā he for seven days fought with the monkey kings Mainda and Dvivida, who then paid tribute, . From Kiṣkindhā S. marched towards Māhiṣ matī and fought with king Nīla, but was exposed to great risk, as Agni assisted Nīla, so that the army of S. all appeared to be on fire, . S. was not afraid, but purifying himself by touching water he praised Agni saying that his exertion was for Agni, etc . Then S. spread some kuśa grass, and sat n in front of his troops. And Agni did not pass over him, but said that he had only been trying him, and though he should protect this city as long as there was a descendant in Nīlas line, he nevertheless would accomplish the desire of S. When Agni had disappeared, Nīla came at the command of that deity and paid tribute. Then S. went further towards the south and vanquished the king of Tripura, etc and then returned to Yudhiṣṭhira, . d S. in Dantakūra conquered the Kaliṅgas, shooting arrows by both the left and the right hand, . g S. had vanquished the Kāśis, the Aṅgas, the Magadhas, and the Kaliṅgas. Only four men are his equals in strength, viz. Aśvatthāman, Dhṛṣṭaketu, Rukmin, and Pradyumna, . k Steeds of sable bodies and backs variegated like the wings of the tittiri bird, all presented by his gratified brother Phālguna, and superior to those of Phālguna himself, cheerfully carried S ʹ, ʹ, ʹ, . b, . Āśvineya, sg. and dual, Aśviṇīsuta, dual, Aśvisuta, dual, Bharataśreṣṭha, dual, Bharatarṣabha, Bharatasattama, Kauravya, Kurunandana, Mādravatīputra, sg. and dual, Mādravatīsuta, sg. and dual, Mādreya, sg. and dual, Mādrinandana, sg. and dual, Mādrīnandanaka, dual, Mādrīnandakara, Mādrīputra, sg. and dual, Mādrīsuta, sg. and dual, Mādrītanūja, dual, Nakulānuja, Pāṇḍava, sg. and dual, Pāṇḍunandana, Pāṇḍuputra, Pāṇḍusuta, Tantipāla, Yama, dual, Yāmaja, dual.
Sahadeva2, king of the Magadhas, son of Jarāsandha . Jarāsandhasuta, Jarāsandhātmaja, Jārāsandhi, Māgadha.
Sahadeva3, a ṛṣi, .
Sahadeva4, an ancient king .
Sahadevaja = Meghasandhi, .
Sahadevasūnu = Śrutakarman, .
Sahadevātmaja = Megha sandhi, .
Sāhadevi1 = Somaka, .
Sāhadevi2 = Śrutakarman, .
Sahaja, a king .
Sahajanyā, an Apsaras .
Sahasrabāhu1, a warrior of Skanda. u . Do. = Skanda, . Do. = Śiva, .
Sahasrabāhumukuṭa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sahasrabhū = Skanda, .
Sahasrabhuj = Skanda, .
Sahasrabhujamanyu = Śiva, .
Sahasracaraṇa1 = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Sahasracaraṇekṣaṇa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sahasracitya1, a prince . next and Sahasrajit1.
Sahasracitya2, a Kaikeya king. Nārada said The Kekaya king S. was the grandfather of Śatayūpa, resigning his king to his eldest son, he retired into the woods and after great penances attained to the region of Indra, where have often seen him, .
Sahasraśiras1 = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sahasraśirasa = Viṣṇu, .
Sahasraśīrṣa1 = Śiva, . Do. = Skanda, . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Sahasrada = Śiva .
Sahasrādhmātaghaṇṭa = Śiva .
Sahasradṛś = Indra, q.v.
Sahasrahasta = Śiva .
Sahasrajit1, a king . Sahasracitya1.
Sahasrajit2 = Viṣṇu .
Sahasrajyotis.
Sāhasraka, a tīrtha .
Sahasrakiraṇa = Sūrya, .
Sahasrākṣa1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Sahasralocana = Indra, q.v.
Sahasrāṃśu = Sūrya, q.v. Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sahasramūrdhan1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sahasranāma = Viṣṇu, .
Sahasranayana1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Śiva, .
Sahasranetra = Indra, q.v.
Sahasranetrapāda = Śiva, .
Sahasrapad1, a ṛṣi. One day Ruru in consequence of his vote for the destruction of the serpents was about to kill an old ḍuṇḍubha, but this objected that he had e him no harm . He told that he was formerly a ṛṣi, named S who had been metamorphosed by the curse of a brahman, . The ḍuṇḍubha said had a friend named Khagama one when he was engaged in the agnihotra, made a mock snake of blades of grass in order to frighten him, and he went into a swoon then he cursed me saying that should be turned into a venomless serpent, until had seen Ruru. S. then recovered his original form, and told Ruru that a brāhmaṇa never should take life which was the duty of the kṣatriya. Uraga.
Sahasrapad2, a brahman . the prec.
Sahasrapad3 = Śiva . Do. = Skanda, . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Sahasraraśmi = Sūrya, .
Sahasrārcis = Viṣṇu .
Sahasrasūryapratima = Śiva .
Sahasratuṣṭi = Skanda, .
Sahasravāc, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sahasravadanojjvala = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sahasravaktra = Skanda, .
Sahasrodyataśūla = Śiva .
Sahāya = Śiva .
Sahiṣṇu = Viṣṇu .
Sahma v. Suhma, pl.
Sahya1 .
Sahya2, a mountain . g, .
Saikata, pl a class of ṛṣis . Sikata. pl.
Saindhava1 = Jayadratha, .
Saindhava2 = Vṛddhakṣatra, .
Saindhava3, pl a people = Sindhu, pl .
Saindhava4, adj. .
Saindhavaka, adj. .
Saindhavāraṇya, name of a forest .
Saindhavāyana, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Sainyaniryāṇa .
. The Pāṇḍavas had seven akṣauhiṇīs led by Drupada, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira consulted with his brothers about the election of a general issimo, who might also withstand Bhīṣma. Sahadeva, etc proposed Virāṭa, etc. . Kṛṣṇa named Dhṛṣṭadyumna, who was elected. Then they marched out to Kurukṣetra, with Bhīma in the van, etc. . Draupadī with her ladies, etc remained at Upaplavya. The Kekaya princes, etc. marched behind Yudhiṣṭhira, keeping him in their centre. In the rear were Virāṭa, etc chariots, etc. Anādhṛṣṭi, etc. marched surrounding Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. Entering Kurukṣetra, they blew their conches, also Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna Pāñcajanya filled them with joy . Yudhiṣṭhira encamped on Kurukṣetra. Kṛṣṇa, etc. each did some special work. At the holy Hiraṇvatī, Kṛṣṇa caused a moat to be excavated. There were assembled hundreds upon hundreds of skilled mechanics in receipt of regular wages, and surgeons and physicians, etc. Then their allies began to march thither . When Kṛṣṇa had departed, Duryodhana urged Kaṛna, Duḥśāsana, and Śakuni to make preparations for battle, which was fixed to commence the next morning . At the request of Yudhiṣṭhira, Kṛṣṇa related Duryodhanas, etc project of imprisoning him neither Bhīṣma nor Droṇa said any thing on that subject indeed, all of them follow Duryodhana, except Vidura... War is that which should now take place. Yudhiṣṭhira gave order to array the troops, but then he complained that he should slay his preceptors, etc. Arjuna reminded him of what Kuntī and Vidura had said through Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa affirmed it. The Pāṇḍavas and their soldiers passed the night in great happiness . After that night had passed away, Duryodhana arranged his eleven akṣauhiṇīs, under Kṛpa, etc. . Referring to a contest between the brahmans, whom also the vaiśyas and the śūdras followed, and the kṣatriyas among the Haihayas, Duryodhana urged Bhīṣma to become their generalissimo. Bhīṣma said that he did not see upon earth the warrior that was equal to him, except Arjuna but Arjuna would never openly fight with him Bhīṣma said he could, in a trice, destroy the universe with As Rā and men but the Pāṇḍavas he could not exterminate but he would slay every and either Karṇa or Bhīṣma should fight first. Karṇa declared he would not fight before Bhīṣma was slain then he would fight with Arjuna. Then Bhīṣma was solemnly installed, under a bloody shower, etc. Then they marched out to Kurukṣetra, and Duryodhana and Karṇa caused the camps to be measured out on a level part of the plain . When Yudhiṣṭhira heard that Bhīṣma had been installed in the command of the Kuru army, he summoned his brothers and Vāsudeva, and selected seven leaders for his seven akṣauhiṇīs Drupada, etc and above them all Dhṛṣṭadyumna and Dhanañjaya of curly hair was made the leader of all those leaders and Kṛṣṇa the leader of Arjuna and driver of his steeds. Halāyudha, etc. came there, and Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. rose from their seats and offered worship to Halāyudha. Halāyudha said that a fierce slaughter was inevitable, that the Pāṇḍavas would certainly win because of the help of Kṛṣṇa, that he had repeatedly tried to prevail upon Kṛṣṇa to remain neuter that he would himself but as he could not be without Kṛṣṇa, he would repair to the tīrthas of the Sarasvatī. Then he set out for his tīrthayātrā . About this time there came to the Pāṇḍava camp Bhīṣmakas son Rukmin . He entered the camp with an akṣauhiṇī of troops, from desire of ng what was agreeable to Vāsudeva. He offered Arjuna his assistance, if he was afraid. He would slay everyone Droṇa, etc. . Arjuna, mentioning his exploits against the G at Khāṇḍava, against the Nivātakavacas and Kālakeyas, at Virāṭas city, and that he had paid his respects for battles sake to Rudra, etc would not say he was afraid. Rakmin then went to Duryodhana, saying the same words, and was rejected in the same way. Then the Pāṇḍavas again consulted, presided over by Yudhiṣṭhira . Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sañjaya to tell him all that had happened in the matter of encamping, and complained that though he understood the defects, he could not with stand Duryodhana. Sañjaya said that he ought not to impute the fault only to Duryodhana as to our acts, some say that everything is ordained by God some that they are the result of free will others that they are the result of those of our past lives .
. After the nuptials of Abhimanyu the Kurus, etc. next morning assembled in the presence chamber of Virāṭa. Kṛṣṇa spoke about the affairs of the Pāṇḍavas, and proposed to send an ambassa to Duryodhana, etc in order to induce them to give half the king to Yudhiṣṭhira . Baladeva approved of it, and said that the ambassa ought to salute Bhīṣma, etc that Yudhiṣṭhira had been wrong in challenging Śakuni, and that Duryodhana only ought to be addressed in a conciliatory tone, that war might be avoided . Sātyaki severely blamed Baladeva, and asserted that it was Yudhiṣṭhira who had been challenged in the game at dice, that he could not have declined according to the rules of the Kṣatriya caste, and that Śakuni had won by a trick the Kauravas had not obeyed Bhīṣma and Droṇa they ought to be besought by sharp arrows they could not withstand Yuyudhāna, etc. . Drupada approved of what had been said by Baladeva, except that Duryodhana should not be addressed mildly, and they ought also to send messengers to Śalya, etc. to collect an army his own purohita ought to be sent to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Duryodhana, Bhīṣma, and Droṇa . Having approved of Drupadas words, Kṛṣṇa set out for Dvārakā, and the Pāṇḍavas and the Dhārtarāṣṭras began to make preparations for war, and collect troops and Drupada despatched his purohita to the Kurus . Drupada gave instructions to his purohita, who set out for Hāstinapura with a following of disciples . After Kṛṣṇa, etc. had set out for Dvārakā, Arjuna and Duryodhana come thither, while Kṛṣṇa was asleep Duryodhana sat n at the head of the bed after him Arjuna came and stood at the back of the bed. And when Kṛṣṇa awoke, he first saw Arjuna. Arjuna chose for his partner Kṛṣṇa himself, who was not to fight Duryodhana selected for himself Kṛṣṇas ten crores of Nārāyaṇa cowherds. Balarāma said he would fight neither for Kuntīs sons nor for Duryodhana. Kṛtavarman gave an akṣauhiṇī to Duryodhana. Kṛṣṇa promised to become Arjunas charioteer Arjuna came back to Yudhiṣṭhira with Kṛṣṇa and the flower of the Daśārha race . Śalya with his sons and troops was advancing in order to join the Pāṇḍavas but Duryodhana caused fine palaces of entertainment to be constructed at different spots for his reception Śalya first thought this had been arranged by Yudhiṣṭhira, until Duryodhana came forward and showed himself then he promised Duryodhana to become the leader of his army. Śalya, however, first proceeded to the Pāṇḍavas at Upaplavya, and told them about the matter. He promised Yudhiṣṭhira that when he became Karṇas charioteer he would act so that Karṇa might be dispirited and in order to comfort Yudhiṣṭhira he reminded him that Śakra had to endure, together with his wife, very great misery . At the request of Yudhiṣṭhira, Śalya related the ancient story of the great misery endured by Indra and his queen . So Yudhiṣṭhira should also regain his king. This story of the victory of Indra, equal to the Veda, should be listened to by a king desirous of victory he who reads it with a heart full of religious faith is purified from his sins, etc. Śalya repeated his promise to damp the spirits of Karṇa, and went with his army to Duryodhana . Yuyudhāna, etc. came to Yudhiṣṭhira with troops . For the Pāṇḍavas there were thus assembled seven akṣauhiṇīs of troops from various directions. In the same way king Bhagadatta, etc. came to the Dhārtarāṣṭras. And thus Duryodhana had a force which numbered eleven akṣauhiṇīs, so that there was no room for them in the city of Hāstinapura but the Pañcanada, the whole Kurujāṅgala, etc full of ābundant corn and wealth, was entirely overspread with the army of the Kauravas. And this army was beheld by the purohita who had been sent by the Pāñcāla king to the Kurus .
Sairandhrī or Sairindhrī, . Do. said of Damayantī, . Do. said of Draupadī, .
Saisikata, pl a people .
Saisiridhra, pl v. Saisikata, pl.
Sakala = Śiva .
Sakṛdgrāha, pl a people .
Sakṛnnandā, name of a river, .
Sākṣin = Viṣṇu .
Sālaṅghāyana, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Salilapati = Mahāpuruṣa .
Salilarāja = Varuṇa, .
Salilāstra .
Salileśa = Varuṇa, .
Salileśvara = Varuṇa, .
Sama1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sama2, v. Śama.
Sama3 = Viṣṇu .
Samā, a region. c After these regions is seen a habitation of the name Samā. It is of a starry shape with four corners and thirty three maṇḍalas. There dwell the four world elephants, Vāmana, Airāvata, etc and also Supratīka, whose dimensions have for ever remained unascertained there winds blow from all directions and are seized by the elephants with the tips of their trunks and let out over the earth in consequence thereof people draw breath and live, .
Samāśvāsa, name of a fire .
Sāmaga1 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sāmagāyana = Viṣṇu .
Samakarṇa = Śiva .
Samāmnāya = Śiva .
Sāman, mostly, pl .
Sāman = Viṣṇu . Do pl. = Śiva .
Samāna1, name of one of the life breaths . b, . b, . g The host of gods named the Sādhyas had the son Samāna, his son was Udāna, his son was Vyāna, from him arose Apāna, and from Apāna Prāṇa. Prāṇa was childless. This wind
Samāṇa2 = Śiva .
Samaṅga1, name of a herdsman .
Samaṅga2, a ṛṣi . .
Samaṅga, pl a people .
Samaṅgā, a river . .
Samantapañcaka, name of a place = Kurukṣetra . . . u, Kurukṣetrak.Prajāpater uttaravedir ucyateetat Kurukṣetra Sṃ Prajāpater uttaravedir ucyateGadāyuddhap.uttaravedī...Prajāpateḥpuṇye, there Duryodhana died
Samantara, pl a people .
Samaramardana = Śiva .
Samasaurabha, a brahman .
Samāsya = Śiva .
Samātman, Samāvarta = Viṣṇu .
Sāmaveda . b, āntagaṃ dvijaṃUpamanyuaś ca Vedānāṃ, sc. Śiva
Samavegavaśa, pl a people .
Samayajña = Viṣṇu .
Samayapālanaparvan . Asked by Janamejaya, Vaiśampāyana related By the grace of Tṛnabindu and Dharma, the Pāṇḍavas continued to live unrecognized in the city of Virāṭa. Yudhiṣṭhira distributed the wealth he won from Virāṭa among his brothers. In the fourth month the great festival in honour of Brahmán, which was celebrated with pomp in the country of the Matsyas, came about urged by Virāṭa, Bhīmasena there killed the athlete Jīmūta and numerous other athletes the king also made him fight with tigers, lions, and elephants. So also Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva pleased the king in their respective occupations .
Samayasya pālana .
Sāmba, Sambara, Sambarahan, v.Ś.
Sambarana, Sambartta, Sambarttaka, v. Saṃv.
Sambhagna = Śiva .
Sambhalagrāma, name of a city. c, .
Sambhava1 = Sambhavaparvan .
Sambhava2 = Viṣṇu .
Sambhavaparvan . Aṃśāvataraṇa . Śakuntalo pākhyāna . Yayātyupākhyāna . Uttara Yayātyupākhyāna . Pūru vaṃśānukīrtana . Mahābhiṣopākhyāna . Śāntanūpākhyāna . Bhīṣ motpatti . Āpavopākhyāna . Satyavatīlābhopākhyāna. Citrāṅgaākhyāna . Vicitravīryoparama . Bhīṣma Satyavatī saṃvāda . Aṇīmāṇḍavyopākhyāna . Pāṇḍurājyābhiṣeka . Dhṛta rāṣṭravivāha . Karṇasambhava . Kuntī vivāha . Pāṇḍu digvijaya . Pāṇḍu . Vidurapariṇaya . Gāndhārī putrotpatti . Duḥśalotpatti . Dhṛtarāṣṭraputranāmakathana . Pāṇḍu . Vyuṣitāśvopākhyāna . Pāṇḍu . Madayantī . Pāṇḍu . Pāṇḍavotpatti . Pāṇḍu . Vyāsa . Bhīmasena rasapāna . Śaradvat . Droṇa . Ekalavya . Droṇa . Astradarśana . Drupadaśāsana . After a year Dhṛtarāṣṭra installed Yudhiṣṭhira as heir apparent. For continuation see Bhīmasena, Arjuna, Sahadeva, Nakula . The Pāṇḍavas, headed by Arjuna, in war slew Sauvīra, who had performed a three years sacrifice, notwithstanding the invasion of the Gandharvas. The Yavana king, whom even Pāṇḍu had failed to subject, was subdued by Arjuna likewise the Sauvīra Vitula, who had always shown a disregard for the Kurus and the Sauvīra Sumitra, called Dattāmitra . Then, assisted by Bhīma, Arjuna with only a single chariot subjugated all the kings of the East backed by, chariots and in the same way those of the South. Dhṛtarāṣṭras sentiments suddenly became poisoned against the Pāṇḍavas, and from anxiety he could not sleep . Kaṇikavākya .
Sambhinna = Śiva .
Sambodhana, name of a weapon .
Saṃśaptaka, pl a host of Kuru warriors . .
Saṃśaptakanihantṛ = Arjuna, .
Saṃśaptakanisūdana = Arjuna, .
Saṃśaptakavadha .
. Droṇa confessed his inability to seize Yudhiṣṭhira if Arjuna were by. The Trigarta king said that Arjuna had always injured them, and took an oath that either Arjuna or the Trigartas should be slain. This oath was taken by the five brothers Satyaratha, etc with their, chariots, and by the Mālava king, etc. . Then they summoned Arjuna towards the southern part of the field. Arjuna told Satyajit to guard Yudhiṣṭhira, and went out against the Trigartas . THE TWELFTH DAYS BATTLE. The Saṃśaptakas rejoiced at the prospect of fighting Arjuna, who addressed Kṛṣṇa about this ill timed joy, and terrified them with the sound of Devadatta, and attacked them. Subāhu Arjuna Suśarman, etc. Arjuna they fled to Duryodhana but urged by the Trigarta king, they once more returned to the field with the Nārāyaṇa cowherds . Kṛṣṇa conveyed Arjuna to the Saṃśaptakas. The Nārāyaṇas Arjuna Arjuna blew Devadatta and employed the Tvāṣṭra weapon, that confounded the foes, who began to fight each other Arjuna crushed the Lalitthas, etc and with the Vāyavya weapon he dispersed the arrows shot by his foes, and Vāyu blew away crowds of Saṃśaptakas with their steeds, etc. Meanwhile Droṇa attacked Yudhiṣṭhira . Droṇa had arrayed his troops in the shape of a garuḍa Droṇa in the mouth Duryodhana and his brothers = the head Kṛtararman and Kṛpa = the two eyes Bhūtaśarman, etc in its neck Bhūriśravas, etc in the right wing Vinda, etc in the left wing before Aśvatthāman in the back the Kaliṅgas, etc. in the tail Karṇa with his sons, etc. Jayadratha, etc in the bosom in the midst the Prāgjyotiṣa king. Yudhiṣṭhira disposed his troops in the shape of a semicircle. Dhṛṣṭadyumna Droṇa Duṛmukha Dhārtarāṣṭra Droṇa dispersed Yudhi ṣṭhiras host . Droṇa Yudhiṣṭhira Satyajit Vṛka Satyajit was slain by Droṇa Yudhiṣṭhira fled. The Pāñcālas, etc attacked Droṇa, and were consumed Śatā nīka Droṇa, who slew him the Matsyas fled. Droṇa defeated the Cedis, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira Droṇa Śikhaṇḍin, etc Droṇa Droṇa slew Kṣema. Yudhiṣṭhira fled away. Droṇa slew Pāñcālya . Droṇa crushed the Pāñcālas, etc and, supported by the Kurus, he vanquished Sātyaki, etc. . The Pāṇḍavas fled away in all directions . Duryodhana addressed Karṇa in joy, beholding the Pāñcālas, etc broken by Droṇa, and Bhīmasena abaned by the Pāṇḍavas and the Sṛñjayas. Karṇa said that Bhīmasena, followed by Sātyaki, etc would never leave the fight Duryodhana proceeded to Droṇas chariot, where a deafening noise was heard of Pāṇḍava warriors returning to the fight . At the request of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya described the steeds of Bhīmasena, etc especially mentioning Bṛhanta the standards of Droṇa, etc and the bows of Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. . The despondency of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, mentioning Bhīma, etc. . When the Pāṇḍavas returned to fight and attacked Droṇa, the Kurus were afraid. Duryodhana urged his troops against them. Durmarṣaṇa Dhārtarāṣṭra Bhīma Kṛtavarman Yuyudhāna the Sindhu king Kṣatravarman Subāhu Yuyutsu, who cut off the two arms of Subāhu Śalya Yudhiṣṭhira Bāhlīka Drupada Vinda and Anuvinda Virāṭa that encounter between the Matsyas and the Kekayas resembled that between . and As. in days of old Bhūtakarman Sabhāpati Nakulas son Śatānīka Bhūtakarman was slain by Śatānīka Viviṃśati Sutasoma Bhīmaratha slew Śālva Citra senas son Śrutakarman Prativindhya Aśvatthāman the son of Duḥśāsana Śrutakīrti Lakṣmaṇa Paṭaccarahantṛ Vikarṇa Śikhaṇḍin Aṅgada Uttamaujas Durmukha Purujit Karṇa the five Kekaya brothers Durjaya Jaya Vijaya Nīla the Kāśi king Jayatsena Kṣemadhūrti Bṛhanta Sātyaki the Cedi king Ambaṣṭha Kṛpa Vārdhakṣemi Soma dattas son Maṇimat Vṛṣasena Pāṇḍya Ghaṭotkaca Alambuṣa Duryodhana Bhīmasena the Aṅga king Bhīma slew him, and his divisions fied the Prāgjyotiṣa king Bhīma Bhīma escaped from the elephant, but was supposed to have been slain Yudhiṣṭhira Bhagadatta the Daśārṇa king Bhagadatta Bhagadatta Yuyudhāna Bhagadatta destroyed the Pāṇḍava troops Bhīma Bhagadatta, whose elephant frightened Bhīmas steeds, that bore Bhīma away Ruciparvan Bhagadatta, who slew him Abhimanyu, etc Bhagadattas elephant Yuyutsu had his steeds and charioteer trod n and fled Duryodhana Abhimanyu Arjuna, etc. Bhagadatta the Pāṇḍava troops fled . Urged by Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa began to proceed against Bhagadatta the Saṃśaptakas challenged Arjuna, and he encountered them, shot the Brāhma weapon, defeated and slew them, and then turned against Bhagadatta but as Suśarman with his brothers followed him from behind, he again attacked Suśarman, and then again Bhagadatta Bhagadatta, at last, by means of mantras changed his hook into the Vaiṣṇava weapon, which, received by Kṛṣṇa on his breast, became a garland. As Arjuna taxed Kṛṣṇa for his taking part in the battle, Kṛṣṇa related the history of the Vaiṣṇavāstra . The great Asura has now been divested of that supreme weapon now slay Bhagadatta, that enemy of the gods, even as formerly for the benefit of the worlds slew the Asura Naraka. Arjuna then slew both Bhagadatta, and the elephant . Then Arjuna slew the two brothers Vṛṣa and Acala . Dhṛtarāṣṭras sons attacked Arjuna, and Śakuni created illusions in order to confound him and Kṛṣṇa clubs, etc and asses, etc which Arjuna slew with celestial weapons then darkness, whence pro ceeded harsh voices this Arjuna dispelled with the weapon Jyotiṣka then waves of water, dried up with the Āditya weapon Śakuni fled. Arjuna slaughtered the Kuru army one stream proceeded towards Droṇa, one towards Duryodhana a fierce battle took place on the southern side between Arjuna and the Kurus. The various divisions of Yudhi ṣṭhiras force smote the foe on every part of the field . Droṇa the Kurus Yudhiṣṭhira, etc the Pāṇḍavas Nīla Aśvatthāman, who slew him the Pāṇḍavas regretted that Arjuna was engaged in the southern part of the field in slaughtering the Saṃśaptakas and the Nārāyaṇa force . Bhīmasena Bāhlīka Karṇa Droṇa, etc. Bhīma Yudhiṣṭhira despatched Nakula, etc to the rescue of Bhīma Bhīma, etc Droṇa the Pāṇḍavas, etc. Droṇa, etc. . Arjuna, having slain the Saṃśaptakas, Droṇa the Kurus Arjuna, who employed the Āgneya weapon Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc. Karṇa Arjuna slew three of Karṇas brothers Bhīma slew fifteen of Karṇas combatants Dhṛṣṭadyumna slew Candra varman, etc. Duryodhana, etc. Sātyaki, rescuing Karṇa Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc. protected Sātyaki. At sunset the armies retired .
Sameḍī, a matṛ. u, .
Saṃgraha, etc see below under Saṅg.
Saṃhanana, son of Manasyu .
Saṃhatāpana, a serpent .
Saṃhitā, .
Saṃhlāda, an Asura . next.
Saṃhrāda, an Asura . the prec.
Saṃhṛṣṭa = Śiva .
Samīcī, an Apsaras .
Samīhana = Viṣṇu .
Samīka, v. Śamīka.
Samīra, pl a people.
Samīraṇa1 = Vāyu, q.v. Do. = Viṣṇu .
Samitiñjaya1, a Vṛṣṇi . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Saṃkalpa, etc see below under Saṅk.
Sammita = Viṣṇu .
Sammohana, name of a weapon .
Saṃnyāsakṛt = Viṣṇu .
Sampanna = Śiva .
Sampāti1, a vulture, brother of Jaṭāyus .
Sampāti2, a Kuru warrior .
Sampratardana = Viṣṇu
Sampravartaka = Śiva .
Sampriyā, Mādhavī, a princess .
Saṃrāj = Kṛṣṇa, .
Samṛddha, a serpent .
Saṃsaptaka, pl Saṃsaptakavadha, v. Saṃś.
Saṃskṛti = Kṛṣṇa, .
Saṃsthāna, pl a people .
Saṃsthāna = Viṣṇu .
Samudra . b The Ocean is the home of Varuṇa, the charming abode of the Serpents, of the subterranean fire, the asylum of the Asuras, the parent of Pāñcajanya formerly it was agitated by Govinda in the shape of a wild boar Atri could not fathom its bottom in years, it is the bed of Viṣṇu at the dawn of every yuga and the refuge of the mountain Maināka under the fear of the falling thunderbolt, it offers waters as sacrificial butter to the fire issuing from the mouth of Vaḍavā, . b, . u, . b, Sāgara, Udadhi. Do. = Śiva .
Samudra, pl. . u, . Do. = Śiva .
Sāmudra = Citrasena5, .
. b Repetition from, .
Samudrādhivāsa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Sāmudraka, a tīrtha .
Samudrāmbarasannibha = Śiva .
Samudramahiṣī = Gaṅgā, .
Sāmudraniṣkuṭa, pl a people .
Samudrasena, a king .
Samudrasenaputra = Candrasena, .
Samudravega, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Samudronnādana, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Saṃvaha, name of a wind. k The wind which supports the clouds and divides them into diverse portions, which melts them for pouring rain, and once more solidifies them, which is perceived as the sound of the roaring clouds, etc this fourth wind is called S .
Saṃvaraṇa, a king, son of Ṛkṣa, husband of Tapatī, and father of Kuru . During the reign of S. the king suffered much from famine, pestilence, drought, and disease. The king of the Pāñcālas invaded the Bhāratas with ten akṣauhiṇīs and defeated them. S. with his relatives took shelter in the forests on the banks of the Sindhu, where the Bhāratas lived for, years within their fort. Then they made Vasiṣṭha their purohita, who appointed S. to be sovereign of the whole kṣatriya race. S. then retook the ancient capital of Bharata and once more made the monarchs pay tribute to him, . Ājamīḍha, Ārkṣa, Paurava, Pauravanandana, Ṛkṣaputra.
Saṃvarta1, a Brahmarṣi, son of Aṅgiras . b, . b, . b, . Āṅgirasa, Viprarṣi.
Saṃvarta2 = Śiva .
Saṃvartāgni, the fire of dissolution, .
Saṃvartaka1, adj . Do. subst . Do. Sūrya, . Do a serpent .
Saṃvartakāgni = Sūrya, .
Sāṃvartakāgni, .
Saṃvartabalāhaka = Śiva .
Saṃvarta Maruttīya, adj. .
Saṃvartavāta, the wind of dissolution, .
b . Vyāsa said In the Kṛta age Manu was the ruler Prasandhi Kṣupa Ikṣvāku Viṃśa Viviṃśa Khanīnetra Suvarcas Karandhama Avikṣit Kārandhama Marutta . Desirous of performing a sacrifice, Marutta, coming to Meru, on the northern side of Himavat, caused thousands of gold vessels to be forged there on a huge golden hill he performed the rites along with other princes . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Vyāsa said As the offspring of Prajāpati Dakṣa, . and As challenged each other, so did Aṅgiras sons Bṛhaspati and Saṃvarta troubled by his elder brother Saṃvarta went naked to the woods. Indra, having vanquished the As appointed Bṛh. as his priest. Formerly Aṅgiras was the family priest of king Karandhama so also of his son Avikṣit . His son Marutta used to defy Indra, and Indra used to defy Marutta, but could not prevail over him. Then Indra took the promise from Bṛh. that he would not perform priestly offices for Marutta . Vaiśampāyana said Then Indra was cured for his envy and went home . Vyāsa said The ancient tale of the discourse between Bṛh. and Marutta is cited in this connection. Marutta in vain tried to persuade Bṛh. to officiate at his sacrifice . ṛ. Nārada told him to apply to Saṃvarta, who now, desirous of seeing Maheśvara, wandered about in Vārāṇasī in the garb of a madman having reached the gate of that city, thou must place a dead body somewhere near it, and the man who shall turn away on seeing the corpse, thou know that man to be Saṃvarta if he should ask thee to follow me, said Nārada, thou mayst even tell him without hesitation that have ascended the pyre. Vyāsa said By acting thus, Marutta found Saṃvarta in a lonely place Saṃvarta covered him with mud and ashes and phlegm and spittle. At last he sat n under a nyagrodha tree . Marutta told him the matter Saṃvarta then, as a lunatic, scolding Marutta repeatedly with harsh words, told him to go to Bṛh. first, and taking Bṛh.s permission he might come back. As Marutta said that he had already been repulsed by Bṛh and that he now desired to sacrifice even with all his goods in order to outstrip Indra, Saṃvarta consented, if Marutta would agree to all that Saṃvarta would ask him to as Bṛh. and Indra were certain to all they could to injure Marutta. Marutta took an oath to this. Saṃvarta said that Marutta would surpass Indra, and G. he himself had no desire for wealth, but would only what was disagreeable to Indra and Bṛh. . Saṃvarta said There is a peak Muñjavat on the Himālaya, where Śiva is constantly engaged in austerities go thither and appease Śiva, whose names are Śarva, etc. then thou shalt acquire that gold. Marutta acted accordingly Bṛh. became sick from envy Indra with . came and was told about the matter . He despatched Agni to Marutta, asking him to let Bṛh. officiate as his priest instead of Saṃvarta, promising him the greatest rewards Saṃvarta threatened to burn Agni with his fearful eye, if he ever came again on such an errand. Agni was frightened and returned to Indra and Bṛh. and said that Marutta had refused and did not care for his promises. Indra asked Agni to return to Marutta, and threatened him with Indras thunderbolt if he did not obey Agni, afraid of Saṃvarta, suggested that the G. king should go Indra said that nobody could burn Agni Agni asked why then Vṛtra could deprive Indra of the sovereignty of Heaven Indra, mentioning his victories over the Kālakeyas, Dā and Prahlāda, said that it was because he did not accept soma from a foe, nor strike the weak with his thunderbolt Agni reminded him of Cyavana at Śaryātis sacrifice and the creation of Mada the might of brahmans is greater than that of kṣatriyas . Then Indra sent G. Dhṛtarāṣṭra on the same errand, but in vain. Vyāsa said As the clouds indicated that Indra must be near, Marutta repaired to Saṃvarta, who comforted him, saying that Agni would protect him, and that he would himself dispel the thunder by the winds, and granted him the boon that Indra should come in person to his sacrifice and accept the oblations offered to him, and so should all the gods. And so it happened by the power of Saṃvartas incantations. Re quested by Saṃvarta, Indra himself gave directions to all the gods to erect a hall of assembly, well furnished rooms with a durable staircase for the ascent of G. and Aps and to furnish that portion of the sacrificial ground reserved for the dance of Aps like unto the palace of Indra in heaven Indra said that Maruttas ancestors and the gods had been highly pleased, and told him to offer a red bull to Agni, and a blue bull with a variegated skin to . . Then Indra and the gods returned home. Marutta placed heaps of gold on various spots and distributed immense wealth to the brahmans.
Saṃvatsara1 = Skanda, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Saṃvatsarakara = Śiva .
Saṃvatsarakaro śvattha = Sūrya, .
Saṃvedya, a tīrtha .
Saṃvibhāgapriya = Śiva .
Saṃvṛta = Viṣṇu .
Saṃvṛtta, a serpent .
Saṃvṛtti, a goddess .
Saṃyamana, the abode of Yama . Saṃyamanī.
Sāṃyamani, a Kuru warrior.
Saṃyamanī, the residence of Yama . c, . Saṃyamana.
Saṃyata = Śiva .
Saṃyāti1, son of Nahuṣa .
Saṃyāti2, a king, .
Saṃyoga, Saṃyugāpīḍavāhana = Śiva .
Sana, a mind born son of Brahmán. b, .
Sanaka, a mind born son of Brahmán. b, .
Sanandana, a mind born son of Brahmán. b, .
Sanātana1, a muni .
Sanātana2, a mind born son of Brahmán. b, .
Sanātana3 = Sūrya, .
Sanātana4 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Sanātana5 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sanātana6 Hiraṇyagarbha, .
Sanātanānām api śāśvataḥ = Skanda, .
Sanatkumāra, a ṛṣi, son of Brahmán . u, . b, . b, . b, studied the religion and communicated it to VīraṇaUpamanyuo yoginām asi, sc. ŚivaĀnuśāsanik.gāthāḥ ...So mayyapi abhāṣate, some verses sung by him are quotedKṛṣṇa Vāsudevapramukhāḥ, sc. ṛṣayaḥSvargārohaṇap.after death Pradyumna entered S.
Sanāt sanātanatama = Viṣṇu .
Sanatsujāta, a ṛṣi b, .
Sānatsujāta, adj. .
. As Dhṛtarāṣṭra wished to hear more, Vidura, as he was born in the Śūdra order, did not venture to say more himself, but he thought of that ancient and eternal Ṛṣi who, leading a life of perpetual celibacy, had said that there is no death. The Ṛṣi came, was questioned by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and discoursed upon death, the efficacy of religious acts, etc. .
Sañcāraka, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Saṇḍa, pl a people .
Sandhātṛ = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sandhimat = Viṣṇu .
Sandhiparvan = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sandhyā, a river .
Sandhyā .
Sandhyārāga = Śiva .
Sāṅgarevas, v. Śārṅgarava.
Saṅgraha1, a companion of Skanda. u, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Saṅgrahādhyāya = Parvasaṅ graha, .
Saṅgrāmajit1, a prince .
Saṅgrāmajit2, brother of Karṇa .
Sanīya, pl a people .
Sañjaya1, a Sūta, son of Gavalgaṇa . The muni like Sūta S. was born of Gavalgaṇa, .
Sañjaya2, an ancient king .
Sañjaya3, one of the standard bearers of Jayadratha .
Sañjaya4, a Sauvīra king, son of Vidulā .
Sañjayantī, a city .
Sañjayayāna .
. Drupadas purohita was honoured by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Bhīṣma, and Vidura. He mentioned the eternal duties of kings the Pāṇḍavas had not obtained their share of the paternal wealth the murderous contrivances of the Dhārtarāṣṭras the deceitful game the indignities in the council hall the exile for thirteen years the Pāṇḍavas desired nothing but a peaceful settlement the Pāṇḍavas were more powerful men like Sātyaki, Bhīmasena, and the twins were equal in might to, akṣauhiṇīs Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa nobody could fight . Bhīṣma approved of his speech but Karṇa wrathfully interrupted him. Dhṛtarāṣṭra pacified Bhīṣma, rebuked Karṇa, sent Drupadas purohita back to the Pāṇḍavas, and summoned Sañjaya to the council hall . Dhṛtarāṣṭra gave instructions to Sañjaya, praising the Pāṇḍavas and Kṛṣṇa and some of their adherents, mentioning the killing of Śiśupāla, blaming Duryodhana, and Karṇa, and ordered him to go to Upaplavya to salute them and the five sons of Draupadī, and tell them that Dhṛtarāṣṭra was desirous of peace with the Pāṇḍavas . Sañjaya came to Upaplavya and saluted Yudhiṣṭhira and enquired about Bhīmasena, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira inquired about Dhṛta rāṣṭra, etc and mentioned the prowess of Arjuna, Sahadeva, Nakula, and the Ghoṣayātrā . Sañjaya delivered his message and answered Yudhiṣṭhiras questions . In the presence of the Pāṇḍavas, etc Sañjaya greeted Yudhiṣṭhira, etc and recommended peace, for what, in sooth, is life after having killed all your kinsfolk he mentioned Kṛṣṇa, etc. on the side of the Pāṇḍavas, and Droṇa, etc on the side of the Kauravas . Yudhiṣṭhira said that peace was preferable to war, but complained that Duryodhana had disregarded the words of Vidura, and Dhṛtarāṣṭra had been desirous solely of satisfying his sons that Duryodhanas counsellors were now Duḥśāsana, Śakuni, and Karṇa. He compared Arjuna, Bhīma, Nakula, and Sahadeva with Karṇa and Duryodhana. He claimed Indraprastha for his king . Sañjaya declared that if, without war, the Kurus would not yield his share to Yudhiṣṭhira, then it would be far better for him to live upon alms in the king of the Andhakas and the Vṛṣṇis than to obtain sovereignty by war . Yudhiṣṭhira said that virtue and vice, which are both eternal and absolute, exchange their aspects during seasons of distress he would not seek even what belongs to Prajāpati, or heaven, or Brahmaloka by unrighteous means but he would be guided by Kṛṣṇa, as did Sātyaki, etc. Kṛṣṇa was the great judge of the propriety or otherwise of all acts . Kṛṣṇa said he wished prosperity for both the Pāṇḍavas and Dhṛtarāṣṭra therefore he desired peace but when Dhṛtarāṣṭra and his sons were so covetous, war was inevitable some say that work should be shunned and that salvation is attainable by knowledge but the brahmans know this, that though one may have a knowledge of eatable things, yet the hunger will not be appeased unless one actually eats such branches of knowledge as are of use in ng works bear fruit, but not the other ones. In the other world it is by virtue of work that the gods, etc. flourish. Yudhiṣṭhira is constantly engaged in the study of the Veda he is bent on the horse sacrifice and the rājasūya he rides horses and elephants, etc. if the Pāṇḍavas could see a course of action not involving the slaughter of the sons of Kuru, they would at it. But we must take into con sideration the division into four castes and the respective duties allotted to each . War and weapons were invented by Indra for putting the Dasyus to death. Kṛṣṇa alluded to the game and the role of Śakuni there, to the indignities undergone by Kṛṣṇā from Duḥśāsana and Karṇa, while the Kurus with Bhīṣma at their head did not interfere, and only Vidura took her part and that Duḥśāsana had called the Pāṇḍaras eunuchs at their departure. He would go in person to the Kurus. He compared the evil passions of Duryodhana, etc with the righteousness of Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. . King Dhṛtarāṣṭra with his sons constitute a forest, while the Pāṇḍavas are its tigers not cut n the forest with its tigers, and let not the tigers be driven away from the forest the tiger out of the wood is easily slain the wood also that is without a tiger is easily cut n. Similarly the Dhārtarāṣṭras are as creepers, the Pāṇḍavas are Śāla trees, and the creepers cannot dis pense with a large tree round which it can twine . Sañjaya then bade farewell to Yudhiṣṭhira, etc. . Yudhiṣṭhira spoke approvingly of Sañjayas agreeable speech and excellent conduct as an ambassa, and com pared him to Vidura, and declared him to be as dear to them as Dhanañjaya . He recommended the brahmans to him, and told him to salute Droṇa, etc and the aged, middle aged, and young ladies, the daughters of our house, and the maidservants and manservants, and the many humpbacked and lame ones among them, and those that were defective in limb, or imbecile, and the dwarfs to whom Dhṛtarāṣṭra gave food and raiment from motives of humanity, the blind, the aged, the many that had the use only of their hands, being destitute of legs, the masterless and weak, those that vainly strived to earn a living, the ignorant, in fact, all those that were in pitiable circum stances, all the ambassas arrived from all sides, etc. He concluded with this message to Duryodhana give me back my own Indraprastha, or fight with me . Yudhiṣṭhira said that the Creator gives and takes according to his will. He told Sañjaya especially to salute Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Bhīṣma, and Vidura, and recommend the Pāṇḍavas to them, that they might counsel peace and to say to Duryodhana that the Pāṇḍavas were willing to forgive his insults to Draupadī and Duḥśāsanas dragging her, disregarding Kuntī but they must have their proper share of the king give us even a single province of the empire give us even Kuśasthala, Vṛkasthala, Mākandī, Vāraṇāvata, and in the fifth place any other village that thou likest even this will end the quarrel. He said that to see the Kurus and the Pāñśālas live happily united was what he desired . Having returned to Hāstinapura, Sañjaya addressed Dhṛtarāṣṭra at night he praised Yudhiṣṭhira, who shines in his natural perfection, leaving his load of sins to be borne by thee, while Dhṛtarāṣṭras acts were contrary to both religion and profit. In delivering the message from Yudhiṣṭhira he did not mention the alternative of giving them the five villages. He alluded to Arjunas ascending to the very heavens and being honoured there. King Bali, not finding a primary cause, regarded time to be the cause of everything. To morrow morning the Kurus, assembled together in the council hall, will hear the words of Ajātaśatru .
Sañjīvana, name of a jewel .
Sañjīvinī, name of a science .
Sañjña = Mahāpuruṣa .
Sañjñā, wife of Vivasvat and mother of the Aśvins .
Saṅkalpa .
Saṅkalpaja = Kāma, .
Sāṅkāśya, a rājarṣi .
Saṅkarṣaṇa1 = Balarāma, identified with Śeṣa, and as jīva considered as a form of Kṛṣṇa . b, . f, . b, . b, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Saṅkarṣaṇānuja = Kṛṣṇa, .
Saṅkoca, a Daitya . b, .
Sāṅkhya, a system of philosophy, propounded by Kapila . b, . b, . b, . b, . d, . g, . b, .
Sāṅkhya, pl the followers of the Sāṅkhya system. b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . Do. sg. = Śiva, . Do a ṛṣi .
Sāṅkhyamukhya = Śiva
Sāṅkhyamūrti = Mahāpuruṣa .
Sāṅkhyaprasāda, Saṅkhyāsamāpana = Śiva .
Sāṅkhyayoga1 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do a ṛṣi, v. Sāṅkhya3.
Sāṅkhyayoganidhi = Viṣṇu, .
Sāṅkhyayogapravartin = Śiva .
Sāṅkhyātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sāṅkhyarṣi = Kapila, .
Saṅkrama, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Saṅkṛti, an ancient king .
Sāṅkṛti1, one or more ṛṣis .
Sāṅkṛti2 = Rantideva, .
Sāṅkṛtya = Rantideva, .
Saṅkṣeptṛ = Viṣṇu .
Sannateyu, son of Raudrāśva .
Sannihata, name of a fire .
Sannihatī or Sannihityā, name of a tīrtha .
Sannivāsa = Viṣṇu .
Sannyastapāda, pl a people.
Santa, a brahman. b, .
Santāna, name of a weapon .
santānaka, adj .
Santānikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Santāpitṛ = Śiva .
Santarajana, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Sanyastapāda, pl. v. Sannyastapāda.
Saphalodaya = Śiva .
Saptacaru, a tīrtha .
Saptadaśa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Saptagaṅga, a tīrtha . g By giving oblations of water to ones pitṛs at S. and Trigaṅga and Indramārga one obtains amṛta, etc .
Saptagodāvara, a tīrtha .
Saptaidhas, Saptajihva = Viṣṇu .
Saptakṛt, a Viśvadeva .
Saptamahābhāga = Mahāpuruṣa .
Saptapāla, a muni .
Saptarāva, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Saptārcis = Agni, q.v. .
Saptarṣi, pl. . . b, . . d, . z, . . . b, . . . b, . Maharṣi, pl Ṛṣi, pl.
Saptarṣi2, sg. .
Saptarṣikuṇḍa, pl a tīrtha .
Saptasapti = Sūrya, .
Saptasārasvata, a tīrtha on the Sarasvatī . i The seven Sarasvatīs cover this universe. Whithersoever the Sarasvatī was summoned, thither she made her appearance. Her seven forms are Suprabhā, etc. . i.e. Brahmán
Saptatantu = Kṛṣṇa, .
Saptavāhana = Viṣṇu .
Saptavāra, v. Saptarāva.
Sāragrīva = Śiva .
Saraka, a tīrtha . Cf .
Saramā, the bitch of the gods .
Sārameya, mostly pl .
Sarāṃsi = Śiva .
Sāraṇa, a Vṛṣṇi, son of Vasudeva .
Sāraṇa2, a counsellor of Rāvaṇa .
Sāraṅga = Śiva .
Sāraṅgadhvaja = Pāṇḍya, .
Sārasa, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Sārasvata, a ṛṣi, son of Dadhīca and Sarasvatī . gg In days of yore the muni Dadhīca, living as a brahmacārin, had by his austerities afficted Indra with fear. As he could not be turned away even by diverse kinds of rewards, Indra despatched to him the Apsaras Alambuṣā on the banks of the Sarasvatī. At the sight of her his seed fell into the Sarasvatī, the river held it in her womb and brought forth a son whom she brought to the ṛṣis, who granted her a boon, saying that the Viśvadevas, the ṛṣis, the Gandharvas, and the Apsarases would henceforth derive great happiness when oblations of her water were presented to them, and praised her as having sprung from the lake of Brahmán, etc and said that the child should be named S and during a drought of twelve years teach the Vedas to many brahmans, and that she should become the foremost of all sacred rivers. The river took the child with her. Meanwhile, on the occasion of a war between the gods and the Dānavas, Indra wandered through the three worlds in search of weapons, but failed to find such weapons as were fit to slay the enemies of the gods, until Dadhīca, solicited by the gods, gave up his life and Indra from his bones caused many kinds of weapons to be made. With the thunderbolt born of Brāhma energy and inspired with mantras, Indra made a loud noise when he hurled it and slew ninety nine heroes among the Daityas. After a long time a twelve years drought occurred, and the ṛṣis fled away only S. was retained by the Sarasvatī, who supplied him with food, giving him large fishes, and he offered oblations to the ṛṣis and the gods. While wandering with famished stomachs, the ṛṣis had lost the knowledge of the Vedas and solicited one another to lecture on the Vedas. Then they learnt them from S becoming his disciples, in number, though he was but a boy, .
Sārasvata2, a ṛṣi, son of Atri .
Sārasvata3 = Apāntaratama, .
Sārasvata4, adj. . j, . p, .
Sārasvata parva .
Sarasvati1, a sacred river . b, . b, . f, . b, . c, . e, . f, . h, . i, . j, . k, . l, . n, . o, . p, . t, . u, . ee, . gg, . b, . b, . b, . b, . m, . b, . j, . Plakṣā, plakṣajātā, Plakṣavatī.
Sarasvatī, the goddess of Speech . u, . b, . c, . b, . b, . c, . Vāc, Vāṇī. Do. = Śiva . Do appellative, .
Sarasvatī, pl. . i, . b, .
. Mārkaṇ ḍeya related how Sarasvatī instructed Tārkṣya about the celestial regions, and especially about the efficiency of different presents to brahmans. Then she spoke of the agnihotra she said she had come from the agnihotra to clear away the bts of the brahmarṣis, and that she was nourished by sacrifice. Tārkṣya asked her about the salvation taught by Sāṅkhya and Yoga she again mentioned the Vedic sacrifice .
Sārasvatya, adj. . f, .
Sārathi = Mahāpuruṣa .
Sarayū, a river . b, . b, .
Sarga1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sariddvīpa, v. Paridvīpa.
Saridvarāsuta = Bhīṣma, .
Sārika, a muni .
Sārisṛkka or Sārisṛkva, a śārṅgaka, son of Mandapāla .
Saritaḥ, foll . Do. = Śiva .
Saritpati = Samudra, .
Sarpa, one of the Rudras .
Sarpa, mostly pl . Do. sg. said of Karkoṭaka, . Do said of Nahuṣa, . Do. said of Sumukha, . Nāga, Pannaga.
Sarpaśīranivāsana = Śiva .
Sarpadevī, name of a tīrtha .
Sarpamālin, a muni .
Sarpamātṛ = Kadrū, .
. Questioned by Śaunaka, Sauti enumerated the names of the principal snakes Śeṣa, etc. .
Sarpānta, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Sarparāja = Nahuṣa, . Do. = Vāsuki, .
Sarparājan = Vāsuki, .
Sarpasattra, .
Sarpasattra . b . Compelled by the mantras innumerable snakes fell into the fire . Caṇḍabhārgava was the hotṛ at the snake sacrifice, the old Kautsa the udgātṛ, Śārṅgarava the brahman, and Piṅgala the adhvaryu. Vyāsa, etc were the Sadasyas. Takṣaka repaired to Indra, who comforted him saying Brahmán was pacified by me for thy sake. Vāsuki summoned his sister, who told the matter to Āstīka Āstīka comforted Vāsuki and went to the Snake Sacrifice, but was not at first admitted by the r keepers, wherefore he gratified them then he began to ae the king, etc. . Comparing his sacrifice to Somas, Varuṇas, and Prajāpatis in Prayāga of old, and to Indras, etc he praised Janamejayas protection of his subjects, and his abstinence, and said that he was either Varuṇa or Yama, and compared him with Indra, Khaṭvāṅga, etc. . Janame jaya was inclined to confer a boon on Āstīka but the hotṛ declared that Takṣaka was not yet burnt, and the ṛtvijes declared from the śāstras, and the Sūta Lohitākṣa confirmed it from the Purāṇas, that Takṣaka was now hiding in the dwelling of Indra. As the hotṛ with mantras began to pour clarified butter into the fire, Indra appeared in his vimāna with the gods, Vidyādharas and Apsarases, and Takṣaka hid himself in the upper garment of Indra. Janamejaya ordered to throw Indra himself into the fire together with Takṣaka. Shaking off Takṣaka, Indra quickly returned to his own abode. Takṣaka was now falling from heaven, and Janamejaya promised to grant to Āstīka what he might desire. Āstīka said Let no more snakes fall into the fire, and refused to ask for any other boon . Enumeration of the principal snakes of Vāsukis race that fell into the fire of Takṣakas race of Airāvatas race of Kauravyas race of Dhṛtarāṣṭras race . Janamejaya let the sacrifice come to an end he bestowed wealth unto Lohitākṣa, etc.
Sarpī, sg .
Sarpimālin, v. Sarpamālin.
Sarva1 = Śiva, q.v. Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvā, a river .
Sarvabandhavimocana = Śiva .
Sarvabhakṣa = Śiva .
Sarvabhauma, a prince .
Sarvabhāvakara = Śiva .
Sarvabhāvana1 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Śiva .
Sarvabhūtabhavodbhava = Viṣṇu .
Sarvabhūtāśraya = Śiva, .
Sarvabhūtādi = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvabhūtaguru = Śiva, .
Sarvabhūtahara = Śiva .
Sarvabhūtakara = Śiva .
Sarvabhūtamaheśvara = Śiva, .
Sarvabhutānām antarātman = Viṣṇu, .
Sarvabhūtāntarātman = Śiva, .
Sarvabhūtapati = Śiva, .
Sarvabhūtapitāmaha1 = Brahmán, q.v. Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvabhūtātman, .
Sarvabhūteśa1 = Brahmán, q.v. . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Dharma, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvabhūteśvara1 = Dhātṛ, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvacārin = Śiva .
Sarvacchandaka = Mahāpuruṣa .
Sarvaśastrabhṛtāṃ vara = Viṣṇu .
Sarvāśaya = Śiva .
Sarvaśilpapravartaka = Śiva .
Sarvāśraya, Sarvaśubhaṅkara = Śiva .
Sarvada = Śiva .
Sarvadāśārhabhartṛ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvadamana = Bharata, .
Sarvadānavasūdana = Indra, .
Sarvadaṇḍadhara = Śiva, .
Sarvadarśana = Viṣṇu .
Sarvadarśin = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sarvadeva = Śiva, .
Sarvadevamaya = Śiva .
Sarvadevānāṃ tīrtha, name of a tīrtha .
Sarvadevānāṃ tīrthāni, name of certain tīrthas .
Sarvadeveśa1 = Indra, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Sarvadeveśvara = Śiva, .
Sarvadhārin = Śiva .
Sarvadharmajña = Viṣṇu .
Sarvadhātuniṣecitṛ = Sūrya, .
Sarvādi, Sarvadṛś = Viṣṇu .
Sarvaga1, .
Sarvaga2 = . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sarvagandhasukhāvaha = Śiva .
Sarvagati = Mahāpuruṣa .
Sarvaghna = Śiva .
Sarvahrada, a tīrtha .
Sarvajña1 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Śiva .
Sarvakāśīśa = Yayāti, .
Sarvakālaprasāda, Sarvakāma = Śiva .
Sarvakāmada1 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Śiva .
Sarvakāmadughā, name of a cow . Sarvakāmaguṇāvaha, Sarvakāmavara, Sarva kara = Śiva .
Sarvakarman1, a prince. b, .
Sarvakarman2 = Śiva .
Sarvakurūttama = Arjuna, . Do. = Bhīṣma, .
Sarvalakṣaṇalakṣaṇya = Viṣṇu . Sarvalakṣaṇalakṣita, Sarvalālasa, Sarva locana = Śiva .
Sarvalokaguru = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvalokakṛt1 = Brahmán, q.v. = Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Śiva .
Sarvalokamaheśvara = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvalokāmara = Indra, .
Sarvalokanamaskṛta = Sūrya, .
Sarvalokānāṃ pati = Śiva, .
Sarvalokapati = Manu Svārociṣa, .
Sarvalokapitāmaha1 = Brahmán, q.v. Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvalokaprajāpati = Śiva .
Sarvalokeśvara1 = Balarāma, . Do. = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvalokeśvareśvara = Śiva, .
Sarvam āvṛtya tiṣṭhasi = Śiva .
sarvamedha, a sacrifice, .
Sarvanāgaripudhvaja = Kṛṣṇa, . Sarvāṅga, Sarvāṅgarūpa, Sarvapārśvamukha, Sarvapāvana = Śiva .
Sarvapitṛ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvapraharaṇāyudha = Viṣṇu .
Sarvaprāṇiṣu nityastha = Agni . Sarvapūjita, Sarvaratnavid, Sarvasādhana, Sarvasādhuniṣevita = Śiva .
Sarvasaha = Viṣṇu .
Sarvasaṅgā, a river .
Sarvasāraṅga, a serpent .
Sārvasenī = Sunandā, wife of Bharata, .
Sarvasūkṣma = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvāsunilaya = Viṣṇu .
Sarvasurapravīra = Skanda, .
Sarvasureśa = Śiva, .
Sarvasyādi = Sūrya, .
Sarvataścakṣus = Viṣṇu . Sarvataḥ śrutimāṃl loke, Sarvataḥpāṇipā dānta = Śiva .
Sarvātman1 = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvatobhadra, name of a battle array .
Sarvātodyaparigraha = Śiva .
Sarvato kṣiśiromukha = Śiva .
Sarvatomukha = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Sūrya, .
Sarvato vṛtta = Mahāpuruṣa .
Sarvatūryaninādin = Śiva .
Sarvavāc = Viṣṇu .
Sarvavariṣṭha = Śiva .
Sarvavāsa1 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Śiva .
Sarvavāsin = Śiva .
Sarvavid1 = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sarvavigraha, Sarvavikhyāta = Śiva .
Sarvayādavanandana = Kṛṣṇa, .
sarvayajña, name of a sacrifice, .
Sarvayogeśvareśvara = Śiva
Sarvayogaviniḥsṛta = Viṣṇu .
Sarvayogin, Sarvāyudha = Śiva .
Sarveśa = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Śiva, .
Sarveśvara = Viṣṇu, .
Sarveṣāṃ prāṇinām pati = Śiva .
Saryāti, v. Śaryāti.
Sat1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu
Satāṃ gatiḥ = Viṣṇu .
Satīrtha = Śiva, .
Satkartṛ, Satkīrti = Viṣṇu .
Satkṛta = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Satkṛti, Satparāyaṇa, Satpathācāra = Viṣṇu .
Satrājit, a Vṛṣṇi prince .
Sātrājitī = Satyabhāmā, wife of Kṛṣṇa, .
Sattā, Sattra = Viṣṇu .
Sattva, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sattva = Śiva .
Sattvastha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sattvat, Sāttvat, Sāttvata, v. Satva, Satva.
Sattvavat, Sāttvika = Viṣṇu .
Satuṅga, v. Sutuṅga.
Satvan, v. Satvāvṛhattvā.
Satvat, pl a people = Sātvata, pl .
Sātvat, pl. = Sātvata, pl .
Sātvata, adj. . c, . b, dharmaṃ only B C. has śāśvataṃdharmaṃdharmaḥ
Sātvata, pl a people i.e. Sātyakipravaraḥ Sānāṃ, i.e. SātyakiGhaṭotkacavadhap.Karṇap.ānāṃ variṣṭhaḥ, sc. KṛtavarmanKṛtavarmā...Sānāṃ mahā rathaḥNārāyaṇīyasarva Smukhyānāṃjñāna, the worshippers of Kṛṣṇa=
Sātvata1 = Balarāma, .
Sātvata2 = Cekitāna, .
Sātvata3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sātvata4 = Kṛtavarman, .
Sātvata5 = Sātyaki, .
Sātvataśreṣṭha1 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Sātyaki, .
Sātvatāgrya = Sātyaki, .
Sātvatāṃ patiḥ = Viṣṇu .
Sātvatamukhya1 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Pra dyumna, . Do. = Sātyaki, .
Sātvatapravara1 = Kṛṣṇa, Do. = Sātyaki, .
Sātvatapuṅgava = Sātyaki, .
Sātvatarṣabha = Sātyaki, .
Sātvatātmajā = Subhadrā, .
Sātvatī = Subhadrā, .
Sātvatīputra1 = Abhimanyu, .
Sātvatīputra2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sātvatīsuta = Śiśupāla, .
Satvāvṛhattvā, .
Satya1, name of one or more brahmans . b, .
Satya2, name of a fire .
Satya3, a Kuru warrior .
Satya4 = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Satya = Śiva .
Satyā = Satyavatī, .
Satyā = Satyabhāmā, .
Satyā, wife of the fire Śaṃyu .
Satyabhāmā, daughter of Satrājit, wife of Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva . Sātrājitī, Satyā.
Satyaśravas, a Kuru warrior .
Satyadeva, a Kuru warrior .
Satyadharman1, a Pāñcāla prince .
Satyadharman2 = Viṣṇu . Satyadharmaparākrama, Satyadharmaparā yaṇa = Viṣṇu .
Satyadhṛti, one or more princes .
Satyajit, a Pāñcāla, son of Drupada . Pāñcāla, Pāñcālya.
Satyaka, a Vṛṣṇi, son of Śini and father of Sātyaki . Śineḥ suta .
Sātyaka = Sātyaki, q.v.
Satyakarman1, a Trigarta prince .
Satyakarman2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sātyaki, a Vṛṣni, properly named Yuyudhāna, son of Satyaka and grandson of Śini. . =, . . Vaivāhikap.Yuyudhānaḥ, came to the wedding of Abhimanyu and UttarāSainyodyogap only B Sañjayayānap.in the army of Yudhiṣṭhira, Yānasandhip. Śiner naptāraṃMādhavasya, Yuyudhānaṃ, sammato ndhaka VṛṣṇīnāṃBhagavadyānap.Śiner naptāraṃaccompanied Kṛṣṇadiscovered the plan of seizing KṛṣṇaKeśavaḥ saha SiḥSainyanir yāṇap.among the seven leaders of Yudhiṣṭhiras troops Yuyudhānaḥ, Ulūkadūtāgamanap Rathātirathasaṅkhyānap.Mādhavaḥ, among the heroes in the army of YudhiṣṭhiraAmbopākhyānap Vṛṣṇīnāṃ pravaraḥBhagavadgītāp Bhīṣmavadhap.attacked Kṛta varmanpierced by Bhīṣma pierced by Bhīṣma assisted Bhīma and Dhṛṣṭadyumnafought with the Gāndhāras, Śinipravīraḥ, attacked Bhīṣmaattacked by Bhūriśravasencounter with Bhūriśravaschecked Droṇathe charioteer of S. slain by Bhīṣmaencounter with Bhūriśravas who slew ten sons of S.attacked by Alambuṣaencounter with Alambuṣa at the horn of the śṛṅgāṭaka vyūhaattacked by Kṛtavarman and Bāhlīkapierced Kṛpafought with Droṇafought with DroṇaSātvataḥ, attacked Bhīṣmapierced Kṛtavarmanpierced by Bhīṣmapierced by Droṇa fought with Duryodhanafought with Alambuṣa and Bhagadatta, Page6 a fought with Aśvatthāman Droṇābhiṣekap pierced Kṛtavarman, pierced by Droṇa Saṃśaptaka vadhap. pramukhā rathāḥ, attacked by Bhagadatta, Abhimanyuvadhap. Pratijñāp.Arjuna exhorted S. to protect YudhiṣṭhiraJayadrathavadhap.Vṛṣṇivīraḥ attacked by Duḥśāsanafought with DuḥśāsanaŚini puṅgavaḥ, rescued Dhṛṣṭadyumnaencounter with Droṇaattacked by Vyāghradattaslew Vyāghradatta, the son of the Māgadha kingYuyudhānenaVṛṣṇivaraḥfought with Droṇa and was rescued by Yudhiṣṭhira, etc.Śinipuṅgavaḥread sa Siḥ with B.at the injunction of Yudhiṣṭhira S. set out to assist ArjunaYuyudhānaḥencounter with Kṛtavarman, etc.fought with Kṛtavarman and the elephant division headed by Rukmarathaslew Jalasandhafought with Droṇa, etc. vanquished Kṛta varmanencounter with Droṇaslew SudarśanaVṛṣṇipuṅgavaḥpraised by his charioteer, vanquished the Yavanas, the Kāmbojas, etc.fought with Duryodhana, etc.vanquished the Saṃśaptakas, Mlecchas, etc.continuationencounter with Duḥśāsana, whom he defeated but did not slayVṛṣṇīnāṃ, pravaraṃŚaineyaḥVārṣṇeyaṃSātvataṃ Keśava Sīslew Alambuṣa defeated the Trigartas and proceeded to where Arjuna wasVārṣṇeyaṃpravarṃ Vṛṣṇivīrāṇāṃdefeated by BhūriśravasPage6 b slew Bhūriśravas when the latter was sitting in prāya, Jayadratha vadhap.rushed at KarṇaYuyudhānaḥfought with Karṇa, etc.Bhīma Sī had slain Jalasandha, chap. Ghaṭotkaca vadhap.only B. encounter with Somadatta, etc.encounter with Somadattaencounter with Somadatta, whom he slew, encounter with Bhūri, whom he slewSātvatāṃ varaḥencounter with Karṇa, etc.encounter with Duryodhana, protected Ghaṭotkaca, YuyudhānaḥŚaineyasyaŚaineyaṃŚaineyasyaYuyudhānaḥ, pro ceeded against Karṇa Pāñcāla ŚaineyauŚiniputraṃŚinipravīraṃŚinivṛṣabhaḥŚinivṛṣabha
Satyaloka, .
Satyamedhas = Viṣṇu .
Satyapāla, a muni .
Satyaparākrama = Viṣṇu .
Satyaratha, a Trigarta prince .
Satyasandha1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Satyasandha2, a Kuru warrior .
Satyasandha3 = Bhīṣma, q.v.
Satyasandha4, son of Karṇa .
Satyasandha5, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Satyasandha6 = Viṣṇu .
Satyasena1, various Kuru warriors .
Satyasena2, a son of Karṇa .
Satyātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Satyavāc1, a Devagandharva .
Satyavāc2 = Śāntanu, . Do. = Skanda, .
Satyavādin = Kauśika6, .
Satyavarman, a Kuru warrior .
Satyavat1, son of Dyumatsena and husband of Sāvitrī . b, . Citrāśva, Dyumatsenasuta.
Satyavat2, a Kuru warrior .
Satyavatī, daughter of Vasu and Adrikā, by Parāśara mother of Vyāsa, wife of Śāntanu and mother of Citrāṅgada and VicitravīryaSarpasattraKṛṣṇasya...Syāḥ sutasya, i.e. VyāsaMatsyaMatsya and S. were born by Adrikā from the seed of Vasu, S. had a fishy smell and was reared by a fishermanVyāsaby Parāśara mother of Vyāsa, by the grace of Parāśara she remained a virgin and emitted a sweet scent extending over a yojana, thence she was named Gandhavatī or Yojanagandhā Pūruvaṃś.by Śāntanu mother of Citrāṅgada and Vicitravīrya, formerly she had born Vyāsaappointed Vyāsa to beget children, Satyavatīlābhop.Śāntanus receiving S. as his wifeCitrāṅga.mother of Citrāṅgada and VicitravīryaVicitravīryop.Bhīṣma Satyavatī saṃv.Bhīṣma consulted with S.Vicitravīryasutotpattiasked by S. Vyāsa begat children on the wis of VicitravīryaDhṛtarāṣṭravivāhaPāṇḍuVyāsaretired to the forest with her daughters in lawPañcendrop.yāḥ sutaḥ, i.e. VyāsaAmbopākhyānap.repetition from foll.Droṇa vadhap.ṛṣeḥ...Kṛṣṇasya Syāḥ sutasyaNārāyaṇīyabore Vyāsa from ParāśaraAśvamedhikap.yāḥ sutasya, i.e. Vyāsa
Satyavatī, daughter of Gādhi and wife of Ṛcīka . b, . b, . Gādheyī, Gādhisutā.
Satyavatī, wife of Nārada .
. Description of Śāntanu, the princes anointed him as King of Kings he ruled the earth from Hāsti napura, the town of the Kurus there was no killing of deer, boars, etc under his reign except for the sacrifices to the gods, ṛṣis, and pitṛs. For thirty six years he, without enjoying the love of women, roamed about in the woods, and his son, Gāṅgeya Devarata, the Vasu, was equal to him. One when pursuing a deer he had wounded along the banks of the Gaṅgā, he saw a youth who, with a heavenly weapon, checked the flow of the Gaṅgā. It was his son who, knowing him, but not known by him, and clouding his perception by illusion, suddenly disappeared. On Śāntanus prayer, Gangā appeared holding the boy, and having told him that he was his son, and that he had studied all the Vedas and their Aṅgas with Vasiṣṭha and knew all śāstras that were known by Uśanas and Bṛhaspati, and by the ṛṣi Rāma Jāmadagnya, and also the rājadharmas, she let him take him to his capital, where he was installed as heir apparent. After four years Śāntanu met with Satyavatī in the wood on the banks of Yamunā, and demanded her hand from her father, the king of the fishermen, who would not consent unless Śāntanu would promise that his son by Satyavatī should become his successor on the throne. Śāntanu would not grant the boon, but returned to Hāsti napura and passed his time in sorrow until Devavrata, having learned from the old minister the cause of his grief, by declaring that he would at the vow of brahmacarya, prevailed upon the fisherman, that he gave Satyavatī to Śāntanu, while the gods and ṛṣis showered flowers upon Devavrata, calling him Bhīṣma. Bhīṣma then took the maiden to Hāstinapura on his chariot, and Śāntanu bestowed upon him the boon of death at choice . Satyavatīputra, Satyavatīsuta, Satyavatyāt maja = Vyāsa, q.v.
Satyavrata1, an ancient king .
Satyavrata2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Satyavrata3, a Trigarta prince .
Satyavrata4 = Śiva .
Satyepsu, an Asura. b, .
Satyeṣu, a Trigarta prince .
Satyeyu, a prince .
Saubala1 = Śakuni, q.v.
Saubala2, pl. . Subalalātmaja, pl.
Saubala3, adj. .
Saubalaka = Śakuni, q.v.
Saubalaka, pl the followers of Śakuni .
Saubaleya = Śakuni, q.v.
Saubaleyī, Saubalī = Gāndhārī, q.v.
Saubalya, pl a people .
Saubha, the aerial city of Śālva5. b, . c, . b, .
Saubha2 = Śālva5, .
Saubhādhipati = Śālva5, .
Saubhadra = Abhimanyu, .
Saubhadra2, name of a tīrtha .
Saubhapati = Śālva5, . Do. = Śālva4, .
Saubhara, name of a fire, son of Varcas .
Saubharaj1 = Śālva5, . Do. = Śālva4, .
Saubhavadhākhyāna .
. . Kṛṣṇa related When Śiśupāla, the son of Damaghoṣa, had been slain, his brother, the Mārttikā vata king Śālva, in order to avenge him, came to Dvārakā in the Saubha, who moved at will and slew many of the Vṛṣṇis, and sought for Kṛṣṇa desiring to kill him. Kṛṣṇa was in Indraprastha at the rājasūya of Yudhiṣṭhira, and when he learnt this on returning home, he set out to slay him, and found him in an island in the ocean, and blowing his conch Pāñcajanya, slew numerous Dānavas. Then, as soon as he heard of the game at dice, he had come to the Pāṇḍavas . . Copious description of the combats with Śālva When Śālva attacked Dvārakā it was well furnished and strongly fortified and defended by Gada, Śāmba, etc. . Cārudeṣṇa, Śāmba, and Pradyumna rushed out against him. They on both sides fought by means of māyā. Śāmba put Kṣemarṛddhi, the commander of Śālvas troops, to flight by a shower of arrows, and slew a Daiteya named Vegavat with his mace. Cārudeṣṇa slew the Dānava Vivindhya with a consecrated arrow. Then Śālva, riding on Saubha, encountered Pradyumna . Riding on his chariot with a gaping makara in its standard, Pradyumna with showers of arrows slew the Dānavas and pierced the heart of Śālva so that he fell in a swoon, but he rose again and wounded Pradyumna about his throat so that he became senseless . Pradyumnas charioteer Dāruki, a sūta, carried him off the field by the help of his fleet steeds, but when Pradyumna had regained his senses, he ordered him to turn the chariot, reminding him of the customs of the Vṛṣṇis in battle, and saying that he had restrained Kṛtavarman, the son of Hṛdika, from sallying out, as he would himself resist Śālva . As Śālva used his māyā of the Asuras, Pradyumna shot him n with the Brahmāstra, and was about to aim another arrow at him, capable of killing any person, when all the hosts of the gods, with Indra and Dhaneśvara, sent Nārada and Śvasana, who ordered him to desist as the creator had destined Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī, to slay him. Śālva then mounted Saubha and went away through the skies leaving Dvārakā . When Śālva had left Dvārakā, Kṛṣṇa returned from the rājasūya, and found Dvārakā deprived of its splenr, etc. He learnt from Hārdikya about the invasion of Śālva, committed the city to the charge of king Āhuka and Ānakadundubhi, etc bowed to Bhava, and set out on his chariot yoked with Śaibya and Sugrīva and with Dāruka for his charioteer, blowing the Pāñcajanya, till he arrived at Mārttikāvata, and pursued Śālva, who, staying in Saubha, remained in the sky above the midst of the ocean a krośa off, so that Kṛṣṇas soldiers could not see it, but were obliged to stand as mere spectators. After a long battle with arrows, in which Kṛṣṇa killed numerous Dānavas, they took to fight by means of illusion, whirling maces, ploughshares, etc and then mountain peaks. As none could ascertain whether it was day or night, or distinguish the points of the horizon, Kṛṣṇa, becoming bewildered, made use of the Prajñāstra, by which he regained light . Dāruka was covered all over with shafts. Then a messenger of Āhuka came from Dvārakā, saying that Śālva had come to Dvārakā and had slain Vasudeva. Kṛṣṇa thought that then Sātyaki, Baladeva, Pradyumna, Cārudeṣṇa, Śāmba, etc must necessarily have been killed first. Now he saw Vasudeva falling from Saubha, and swooned away but, as he, after regaining consciousness, saw neither Saubha, nor Śālva, nor Vasudeva, he concluded that it was illusion . Though Kṛṣṇa could not see Saubha, which had vanished through illusion, he discharged many arrows from the Śārṅga. The Dānavas set up a loud howl, and when Kṛṣṇa, making use of a weapon that pierced the foe following the sound, killed them at one place, the yell ceased at that place and started from another quarter. Then Saubha reappeared at Prāgjyotiṣa. Kṛṣṇa, Dāruka, and the horses were covered by torrents of rocks that concealed them, and the Vṛṣṇis fled in all directions. Kṛṣṇa then destroyed the crags with Indras thunderbolt, Dāruka pointed at Śālva and exhorted Kṛṣṇa to slay him. Kṛṣṇa made use of his Āgneya weapon and hurled his discus Sudarśana against the city of Saubha, that fell cut in twain like the city of Tripura by the shafts of Maheśvara. Then the discus came back into his hands and was hurled against Śālva and cut him in twain. The remaining Dānavas fled in fear. Kṛṣṇa returned to the Ānarttas. It was for this reason that he could not come to Hāstinapura and prevent the gambling. Then Kṛṣṇa took leave of Yudhiṣṭhira, etc and set out for Dvārakā in his chariot yoked with Śaibya and Sugrīva, taking with him Subhadrā and Abhimanyu. Then Dhṛṣṭadyumna set out for his own city, taking with him the Draupadeyas. And the Cedi king, Dhṛṣṭaketu, set out for his beautiful city of Śuktimatī, taking with him his sister . Also the Kaikeyas went away. But the brahmans, vaiśyas, and inhabitants of the country would not leave the Pāṇḍavas. Yudhiṣṭhira in due time ordered his men to make the chariots ready .
Saucitti, a prince .
Sauśalya, pl v. Saubalya, pl.
Sauśruti, a Kuru warrior .
Saudāsa = Kalmāṣapāda, .
Saudeva = Divodāsa, .
Saudyumni = Yuvanāśva, .
Saugandha, name of a caste, .
. When Bhīma was embraced by Hanumat his fatigue went off. Hanumat asked him not to tell anyone that he dwelt there this was the time of the arrival of the gods and of the Gandharvas he declared himself willing if Bhīma might wish it to go to Hāstinapura and slay the Dhārtarāṣṭras, etc and dive into the army of his foes, giving leonine roars and remaining on the flagstaff of Arjunas chariot. Then Hanumat vanished . Description of the proceeding of Bhīma along the Gandhamādana till he found the lotuses . Description of the lotus lake, near Kailāsa, guarded by hundreds of thousands of Rākṣasas, sprung from a cascade near the abode of Kubera, the sporting place of Kubera, frequented by Gandharvas, Apsarases, gods, divine ṛṣis, Yakṣas, Kimpuru ṣas, Rākṣasas, and Kinnaras. Bhīma drank of the water . The Krodhavaśas ordered Bhīma to ask the permission of Kubera before he entered the lake but Bhīma plunged into the water, and as the Rākṣasas attacked him, he slew of them with his mace, inlaid with golden plates, and then drank of the water, by which his strength was fully restored, and gathered saugandhika lotuses, while the Krodhavaśas fled through the sky to the peaks of Kailāsa and gave account to Kubera, who said Let Bhīma take as many lotuses as he likes. The Rākṣasas then returned to Bhīma . As there arose a violent wind with gravel, meteors, thunder, darkness, earthquake, dust, and evil omens, Yudhiṣṭhira, having learned from Kṛṣṇā the depart of Bhīma, and alleging that Bhīma had not formerly e any wrong to the Siddhas, resolved to find out Bhīma and let Ghaṭotkaca carry Kṛṣṇā, while other Rākṣasas carried the Pāṇḍavas and the brahmans, and so they proceeded with Lomaśa to the lake, where the slaughtered Yakṣas were lying, and Yudhiṣṭhira entreated Bhīma never again to offend the gods the Pāṇḍavas began to sport in the lake, and the warders, with rocks for weapons, bowed n in humility. There they dwelt for a short time on the slopes of Gandhamādana, expecting Arjuna . One day when Yudhiṣṭhira, remembering the tīrthas, rivers, etc that they had visited, consulted with Bhīma how they should repair to the abode of Vaiśravaṇa, a voice from the sky said that they must first return to Badarī and thence to the hermitage of Vṛṣaparvan and that of Ārṣṭiṣeṇa. There came a shower of blossoms. According to the counsel of Dhaumya, they all returned to the hermitage of Nara and Nārāyaṇa .
Saugandhikavana, name of a place .
Sauhṛda, pl a people .
Saukanya ākhyāna .
Saumadatti1 = Bhūriśravas, .
Saumadatti2 = Śala, .
Saumaki1 = Drupada, .
Saumaki2 = Satyadharman, .
Saumaki3 = Dhṛṣṭadyumna or Śikhaṇḍin, .
Saumaki4 = Kṣatradharman, .
Saumitri = Lakṣmaṇa, q.v.
Saumya1, a ṛṣi .
Saumya2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Saumya, adj. . b, . u, .
Saupāka, name of a caste, .
Sauparṇa, adj. .
Sauptika .
Aśvatthāman, etc. proceeded towards the south. At the hour of sunset they reached a spot near the encampment. Hearing the shouts in the Pāṇḍava camp, they proceeded farther and reached a dense forest. Dhṛtarāṣṭra interrupted Sañjaya by expressing his grief for Duryodhana, and then inquired about the acts of the three survivors . Sañjaya continued Aśvatthāman, etc laid themselves n for rest under a huge banyan Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman fell asleep Aśvatthāman was kept awake by wrath and the desire of vengeance. He saw a fierce owl coming to that banyan and slaying a large number of crows roosting on its branches at this sight he formed the resolution of slaying the Pāṇḍava army while buried in sleep he roused Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman, unfolded his project before them, and asked for their advice Kṛpa dissuaded him from executing his wicked design Let us repair to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Gāndhārī, and Vidura, and ask them as to what we should Aśvatthāman tried to refute Kṛpas arguments . Kṛpa promised to aid Aśvatthāman if the latter would fight the foe the next morning during daylight Aśvatthāmans answer he would not desist . Kṛpa earnestly remonstrated with Aśvatthāman, who declared his resolution to be unaltered, yoked his steeds to his chariot, and proceeded alone, saying that he would avenge his father Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman followed him. Approaching the Pāṇḍava camp, Aśvatthāman stopped at the gate . He beheld a being of gigantic frame ready to resist him, and fearlessly fought it it devoured all the weapons of Aśvatthāman, who repented of his rash deed, and resolved to seek the protection of Mahādeva, to whom he recited a hymn . A golden altar appeared before him with a blazing fire on it many mighty beings of extra ordinary appearance came there, worshippers of Mahādeva. Aśvatthāman felt no fear at the sight he offered himself to Mahādeva as a libation on the fire Mahādeva appeared and declared that the period of life of everybody in the camp had ran out he gave a sword to Aśvatthāman and filled him with his own energy many invisible beings and Rā. proceeded to his right and left as he set out . He asked Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman to stand at the gate and slay everybody who would seek to escape he entered the Pāṇḍava camp like a thief and slew Dhṛṣṭadyumna, etc. Rā. uttered loud roars in joy also Y. came there Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman set fire to the Pāṇḍava camp in three places Arjuna is incapable of being vanquished by As G Y and Rā. Before midnight the vast host of the Pāṇḍavas was slain by Aśvatthāman the camp was invaded by Rā. and Pś. that gorge upon blood and flesh. Aśvatthāman forgot his grief for his father when morning dawned he issued from the camp and joined Kṛpa and Kṛtavarman. Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked why Aśvatthāman did not achieve such a feat before Sañjaya answered that the absence of the Pāṇḍavas with Kṛṣṇa, as also the sleep, was the cause of Aśvatthāmans success. They congratulated each other and resolved to give notice of the slaughter to Duryodhana . They beheld Duryo dhana still living, surrounded by wolves, hyenas, etc. They lamented and informed him Aśvatthāman asked him, when he came to heaven, to inform Droṇa and embrace Bāhlīka, etc and informed him who were yet alive and who had been slain . Duryodhana regained his senses and praised Aśvatthāman, etc. . Saying we shall all meet again in heaven, he gave up his life breaths his soul ascended to heaven. At early dawn Sañjaya came to the city and lost his spiritual sight. Aśvatthāman, etc ascended their chariots. Dhṛtarāṣṭra breathed long and hot sighs .
Saura, adj. u, . Do pl .
Saurabheya, mostly pl = Kāmadhenuputraḥ, Nīl.ā ivarṣabhaṃpl.khorakaḥ Sānāṃnāgāḥ, read Sauraseyāḥgataṃ, sc. Śiva
Saurabheyī, an Apsaras .
Saurabheyī, mostly pl .
Saurabhī, .
Sauratha, pl a tribe or family among the Śibis .
Sauratheya = Śibi1, .
Saurī = Tapatī, .
Saurya, adj .
Sauti1 = Ugraśravas, the reciter of the Mhbhr . bis, . b, . b, . Sūta .
Sauti2 = Sañjaya, .
Sauti3 = Dāruki, .
Sauti4 = Bandin, .
Sauti5 = Karṇa, .
Sautrāmaṇi, name of a sacrifice, .
Sauvīra1 .
Sauvīra2 = Vipula, .
Sauvīra3 = Sumitra, .
Sauvīra4 = Jayadratha, .
Sauvīra5 = Śalya, .
Sauvīra, pl a people = Suvīra, pl . b, .
Sauvīraka = Jayadratha, .
Sauvīraka, adj. .
Sauvīrarāja . b, . Do .
Sauvīrī .
Sava = Viṣṇu .
Savana, a son of Bhṛgu. b, .
Sāvarṇa, a ṛṣi or a Manu . next.
Sāvarṇi, a ṛṣi or a Manu . the prec.
Sāvitra1 = Karṇa, . Sāvitrin.
Sāvitra2, a Rudra .
Sāvitra3, a Vasu .
Sāvitra, adj. . b, .
Sāvitra, name of a nakṣatra = Hasta .
Sāvitra .
Sāvitrī, daughter of Aśvapati and wife of Satyavat .
Sāvitrī, name of a certain mantra, also a goddess, wife of Brahmán . d, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . d, . g, . c, . Devī.
Sāvitrin = Karṇa, . Sāvitra.
Sāvitrīputraka, pl a people .
Sāvitryavarajā = Tapatī, .
Savitṛ, one of the Ādityas, sometimes identical with Vivasvat . b, . b, . b, Āditye Sur jyeṣṭheĀnuśāsanik.Śiva identified with S.AtriKṛṣṇa Vāsudevaraśmivān, Kṛṣṇa identified with S.Svargārohaṇik. p.Kṛṣṇa identified with S.a mere appellative designing the sunivaivayathāyathāsahasrakiraṇasyaraśmayo sur yathā
Savitṛ = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Savyacārin = Arjuna, .
Savyasācin = Arjuna, q.v.
Sayana, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Seduka, name of a king .
Seka, pl a people .
Senābindu1, one or more kings .
Senābindu2, a Pāñcāla prince .
Senādhipati = Skanda, .
Senājit, name of one or more kings .
Senākālpa = Śiva .
Senānī, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Senāpati.
Senānī = Śiva, . Do. = Skanda, .
Senāpati1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Senānī.
Senāpati2 = Śiva .
Setubandhana . The monkey chiefs began to flock together to Rāma and Sugrīva on Mālyavat. On a lucky day the army set out. Hanūmat was in the van, Lakṣmaṇa in the rear, the army was protected by Nala, etc. . Arriving at the shore of the milky ocean, Rāma thought of means of crossing it. He and Lakṣmaṇa lay n on the seashore, the Ocean appeared to him in a vision and said also have sprung from the race of Ikṣvāku the monkey Nala is a son of Tvaṣṭr, whatever he will throw into my waters will support. Nala then built a bridge, which to this day is known as Nalasetu. At this time Vibhīṣaṇa with four of his counsellors came to Rāma. Sugrīva suspected him to be a spy, but Rāma installed him in the sovereignty of all the Rākṣasas and made him his own counsellor and the friend of Lakṣmaṇa. It was under the guidance of Vibhīṣaṇa that the army crossed the bridge in a month. Rāma then caused the gardens of Laṅkā to be devastated by his monkeys. Rāvaṇas counsellors Śuka and Sāraṇa came as spies and were seized by Vibhīṣaṇa, but dismissed by Rāma. Rāma then sent Aṅgada as his envoy to Rāvaṇa .
Seyana, see Sayana.
Ṣaḍānana = Skanda, .
Ṣaḍaṅganidhāna = Mahāpuruṣa .
Ṣaḍarcis = Skanda, .
Ṣaḍvaktra = Skanda, .
Ṣaṇḍa, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Ṣaṇḍa, pl a people .
Ṣaṇmukha = Skanda, .
Ṣaṣṭī, a goddess .
Ṣaṣṭibhāga = Śiva .
Ṣaṣṭihrada, a tīrtha. p, .
Ṣaṣṭīpriya = Skanda, .
Ṣaṭkarmatuṣṭa = Śiva .
Ṣoḍaśarājaka parva .
. . Nārada told Sṛñjaya the stories of the following kings q.v.
. b . The histories of the same sixteen kings as in Ṣoḍaśarājika, except that Paurava is here named Bṛhadratha and Rāma Jāmadagnya is replaced by Sagara .
Siddha1, a Devagandharva .
Siddha2, an ancient king .
Siddha3 = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Siddha5, pl a class of beings, commonly occurring together with the Cāraṇas, etc .
Siddha6, pl a people .
Siddhabhūtārtha = Śiva .
Siddhagraha, name of a demon .
Siddhakṣetra, .
Siddhaloka, .
Siddhamantra = Śiva, .
siddhānta, .
Siddhapātra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Siddhārtha1, a king .
Siddhārtha2, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Siddhārtha3 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Siddhārthakārin, Siddhasādhaka = Śiva .
Siddhasaṅkalpa = Viṣṇu .
Siddhasenānī = Durgā, .
Siddhayogin = Śiva .
Siddhi1 . q, . u, .
Siddhi2, a fire .
Siddhi3 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Siddhida = Viṣṇu .
siddhikṣetra, .
Siddhisādhana = Viṣṇu .
Sikata, pl a class of ṛṣis .
Sikatākṣa, name of a place .
Silībāka, a muni .
Siṃha = Viṣṇu, .
siṃha, pl. .
Siṃhacandra, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Siṃhaśārdūlarūpa, Siṃhadaṃṣṭra, Siṃhaga = Śiva .
Siṃhagrīva = Aśvatthāman, .
Siṃhaketu1 = Bṛhadbala, .
Siṃhaketu2, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Siṃhala, pl a people . Siṃhalāṅgūlaketana, Siṃhalāṅgūlaketu, Siṃ halāṅgūlalakṣman = Aśvatthāman, .
Siṃhanāda = Śiva .
Siṃhapura, a city .
Siṃhasena1, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Siṃhasena2, a Pāñcālya .
Siṃhavāhana = Śiva .
Siṃhikā, daughter of Dakṣa .
Siṃhikātanava, pl a family of Asuras .
Sindhu, the river Indus . f, . b, . b, .
Sindhu2, the country of the Sindhus on the river Indus .
Sindhu3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sindhu, pl a people = Saindhava, pl .
Sindhudvīpa, an ancient king, son of Jahnu . b, .
Sindhuja, adj. .
Sindhupati1 = Jayadratha, .
Sindhupati2 = Vṛddhakṣatra, .
Sindhurāj = Jayadratha, .
Sindhurāja1 .
Sindhūrāja2 = Jayadratha, .
Sindhurājan = Jayadratha, .
Sindhu Sauvīrabhartṛ = Jayadratha, .
Sindhūttama, name of a tīrtha .
Sinīvāka v. Silībāka.
Sinīvālī, a goddess . u, .
Sīrabhṛt = Balarāma, .
Sita1, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Sita2 = Balarāma, .
Sītā, daughter of Janaka, the Videha king and wife of Rāma Dāśarathi . also the following synonyms Janakātmajā, . Jānakī, . Maithilī, . Vaidehī, q.v.
Sītā, a goddess . b, .
Sītā, one or more rivers . f, . b, .
Sitāśva = Arjuna, .
Sītāharaṇa . . Rāvaṇa caused Mārīca to entice away Rāma by assuming the shape of a deer with golden horns and a golden skin. Seeing this deer Rāma pursued it, like Rudra pursuing the stellar deer in days of yore struck with Rāmas arrow Mārīca, imitating Rāmas voice cried out, calling upon Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa. Lakṣmaṇa, thinking that nobody was able to slay Rāma, at first inclined to stay there and protect Sītā, but as she suspected him, he set out on the track of Rāma. Then Rāvaṇa, in the guise of an ascetic, with shaven head and with a kuṇḍala and a triple staff, came to the hermitage and began to carry away Sītā to Laṅkā on his way he was seen by the vulture Jaṭāyu .
Sitāṅga = Śiva .
Sītā Rāvaṇasaṃvāda . . While Sītā in Laṅkā was grieving for Rāma and was waited on by Rākṣasīs, Rāvaṇa, afflicted by the shafts of Kāma, asked her to accept him as her lord, but was rejected. Sītā continued to dwell there, treated with tenderness by Trijaṭā .
Sītāsāntvana . . In Laṅkā Rāvaṇa placed Sītā in an abode equal to Nandana and caused Rākṣasīs and Piśācīs to guard her. The Rākṣasī Trijaṭā told her of the Rākṣasa Avindhya who had told her of Rāmas and Lakṣmaṇas meeting with Sugrīva and of the curse of Nalakūbara which prevented Rāvaṇa from violating Sītā, and of a dream of evil omens about Rāvaṇa, Kumbhakarṇa, etc running towards a southern direction, but of good omens about Vibhīṣaṇa and his four counsellors, and Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, and Sītā .
Sītavana, name of a tīrtha .
Skanda1, the senāpati of the gods, son of Agni and Svāhā, reared by the Kṛttikās, armed with a dart and having a peacock for his device. . . . . . . . p, . u In days of yore the seed of Maheśvara dropped and fell into a blazing fire Agni could not burn it, and at the command of Brahmán threw it into the Gaṅgā, who, unable to bear it, washed it away on Mount Himavat, where it, on a clump of reeds, developed into S who was seen by the Kṛttikāḥ, and having assumed six mouths, sucked them all. Himavat was transformed into gold, and from this reason mountains became producers of gold. Lying on that golden clump of reeds he was praised by G etc. Gaṅgā waited upon him, and Earth held him the celestial priest Bṛhaspati performed the usual rites the Veda in a fourfold form and the fourfold Dhanurveda and all weapons approached him. One day he saw Śiva and Umā amid a swarm of ghastly creatures . Also the seven Mātṛs were present there, and S . M P R Ā Si Serpents, Dā the birds, Brahmán with his two sons, and Viṣṇu and Indra, and . G. headed by Nārada and . ṛ and Si. headed by Bṛhaspati, and the fathers of the universe who are the gods of even the gods, and the Yāmas and Dhāmas. Śiva, Umā, Gaṅgā, and Agni each thought he will come to me, therefore he by his yoga power assumed four forms Skanda went to Rudra, Viśākḥa to Umā, Śākha to Agni, Naigameya to Gaṅgā. Dā and Rā. made a loud noise. Rudra, Umā, Agni, and Gaṅgā prevailed upon Brahmán, who had formerly given away the sovereignties of G Rā Bh Y birds, and Pn that he gave him the state of a generalissimo among all creatures and Brahmán ordered the kings of the hosts of the gods to wait upon him. Then the gods headed by Brahmán, taking Skanda with them, came together to Himavat for his instal ment on the bank of the Sarasvatī, which at Samantapañcaka is celebrated over the three worlds there . and G. cheerfully took their seats . Collecting all articles for the investiture according to the scriptures, Bṛhaspati duly poured libations into the fire Himavat gave a seat aned with gems, on which Kārttikeya was seated Indra, etc. there came together Brahmán, Kāśyapa, etc poured water from the Sarasvatī upon Skanda, even as the gods had poured water on the head of Varuṇa, the lord of the waters, in order to invest him with sovereignty Brahmán gave to Skanda four mighty companions with speed like the wind, and crowned with ascetic success Nandisena, Lohitākṣa, Ghaṇṭākarṇa, and Kumudamālin. Sthāṇu gave to Skanda a mighty companion capable of producing illusions, and who, in the great battle between the gods and the Asuras, slew with his hands alone millions . Then the gods made over to Skanda an army consisting of Nairṛtas of a form like that of Viṣṇu. Then . with G Y Rā Mu. and P. shouted victory . Then Yama gave him two companions, both of whom resembled Death Unmātha and Pramātha. Sūrya gave him two of his followers, Subhrāja and Bhāsvara Soma gave him two companions Maṇi and Sumaṇi, both like summits of Kailāsa, with white garlands and white unguents. Agni gave to his son the heroic Jvālājihva and Jyotis. Aṃśa gave him five companions Parigha, etc. . Indra gave him two companions Utkrośa and Pañcaka, armed with thunderbolt and club respectively, and who had in battle slain innumerable enemies of Indra. Viṣṇu gave him three companions Cakra, etc. . The Aśvins gave him Vardhana and Nandana, who had mastered all the sciences. Dhāṭr gave him five companions Kunda, etc. . Tvaṣṭr gave him Cakra and Anucakra, both capable of producing illusions, etc. Mitra gave him Suvrata and Satyasandha of great learning and ascetic merits, and capable of granting boons. Vidhātṛ gave him Suprabha and Śubhakarman. Pūṣan gave him two com panions Pāṇītaka and Kālika, with great powers of illusion . Vāyu gave him Bala and Atibala, with great mouths. Varuṇa gave him Yama and Atiyama, with mouths like that of the timi. Himavat gave him Suvarcas and Ativarcas. Meru gave him Kāñcana and Meghamālin. Manu gave him Sthira and Atisthira. Vindhya gave him Ucchṛṅga and Atiśṛṅga who fought with large stones. Samudra gave him Saṅgraha and Vigraha, armed with maces. Pārvatī gave him Unmāda, Śaṅkukaraṇa, and Puṣpadanta. Vāsuki gave him the snakes Jaya and Mahājaya. Similarly S R P etc. gave commanders of forces armed with lances, etc. Moreover, there were several other combatants Śaṅkukarṇa, etc. . Besides, Brahmán gave him thousands upon thousands of mighty companions, devoted to ascetic austerities and regardful of brahmans, of different ages and with different kinds of faces, they spoke various kinds of languages . Also the large bands of the Mothers, those slayers of foes, by whom the universe is pervaded, became the companions of Kumāra the names of the Mātṛs are Prabhāvatī, etc some of them partook of the nature of Yama, some of that of Rudra, etc. they were beautiful like Aps in voice they resembled the kokila, in prosperity Kubera, in battle their energy resembled that of Indra, etc they have their abodes on trees and open spots and crossings of four roads, also in caves, crematoriums, mountains, and springs they speak different languages. Indra gave to Guha a dart for the destruction of the enemies of the gods, and a banner. Śiva gave him a large army named Dhanañjayā, protected by, warriors equal to Rudra himself. Viṣṇu gave him a triumphal garland that enhanced the power of the wearer. Umā gave him two pieces of cloth, of effulgence like that of the sun. Gaṅgā a celestial waterpot produced from amṛta. Garuḍa gave him his favourite son Citrabarhin, a peacock. Aruṇa gave a cock of sharp talons. Varuṇa gave a snake of great energy. Brahmán gave him, as devoted to the Bráhman, a black deerskin and victory in all battles. The gods with Indra praised Kumāra. The G. sung, and Aps. danced. Skanda granted a boon to all the gods, saying shall slay all your foes. He then, with that vast host, set out for the destruction of the Daityas, having Exertion, etc. in the van. All Dai Rā and Dā. fled, pursued by the gods. Millions of darts issued from Skandas dart. He at last slew Tāraka, etc. the foes were consumed with flames, produced by Skanda many were killed by his roars alone, etc. . Balis son, the Daiteya Bāṇa, took shelter within the Krauñca mountain which Kārttikeya pierced with that dart given to him by Agni Vd. soared into the air K. became very anxious Dai. came out and were slain together with that son of the Daitya chief and his younger brother. Repeatedly hurled from Skandas hand, the dart repeatedly came back to him. The gods, G. and M ṛ honoured Skanda, the celestial ladies showered plenty of flowers upon him. Some speak of him as Sanatkumāra, some as the son of Maheśvara, and some as that of Agni, or of Umā, or of the Kṛttikās, or of Gaṅgā. That tīrtha on the Sarasvatī then became a second heaven staying there Skanda gave to everybody various kinds of inion and bestowed the three worlds on the foremost of the Nairṛtas, . . . . d Skanda threw his dart on the Himavat and challenged all beings to draw it up or at least to shake it, . . . . g, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms Āgneya, q.v. Agnidāyāda, . Agnija, . Agniputra, Agnisuta, q.v. Analaputra, Analasūnu, . Analātmaja, . Bhadraśākha, Brahmaṇya, Chāgavaktra, Śākha, Śaktidhara, q.v. Śaktidhṛk, . Śaktipāṇi, . Śaravanālaya, Devasenāpati, Gāṅgeya, q.v. Guha, . Hutāśanasuta, Jvalanasūnu, Jvalanātmaja, q.v. Kārttikeya, . Kṛttikāputra, . Kṛttikāsuta, . Kumāra, . Kumārapitr, q.v. Mahāsena, . Naigameya, Pāvakātmaja, Pāvaki, Pṛṣṭhaja, Raudra, Rudrasūnu, Senānī, Ṣaḍānana, Ṣaḍvaktra, Ṣaṇmukha, Skandarāja, Vahni nandana, Vibudhasattama, Viśākha, q.v.
Skanda, names of, found in the Kārttikeyastava avv. aḥ
Skanda2 = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Skānda, v. Skanda1.
. . The planets and upagrahas, Mātṛs and the gaṇas of the pariṣads preceded by Fire and other terrible gods waited on Skanda. Indra, with the hosts of the gods approached, mounted on Airāvata, in order to kill him. But Skanda defeated them by flames, and when Indra pierced his right side with his thunderbolt, thence sprang forth an armed youth Viśākha, and Indra and the gods sought and obtained the protection of Skanda .
Skandadhara = Viṣṇu .
Skandamātṛ = Durgā, .
Skandāpasmara, name of a demon .
Skandarāja = Skanda, .
Skandaviśākha = Śiva, .
. . Then Svāhā, the daughter of Dakṣa, who had in vain loved Agni from her childhood, prevailed upon Skanda that she should live for ever with Agni, in so far as offerings with mantras to the gods and pitṛs should always be coupled with the name of Svāhā. . Then Skanda was sent by Brahmán to his father Rudra for Rudra and Umā had entered Agni and Svāhā, and from this combination Skanda had sprung Rudras semen had been thrown back upon the hill, whence sprang forth Miñjikā and Miñjika, and portions of it fell into the Blood Sea, into the rays of the sun, upon the earth, and upon the trees, whence sprang forth the various troops of his pāriṣadas, living on flesh. These five classes of spirits should be honoured with sun flowers for the sake of wealth and healing of diseases Miñjikā and Miñjika must be honoured for the welfare of children the females, named Vṛddhikās, who were produced in the trees and live on human flesh, must be worshipped by persons who desire to have children. These are the innu merable gaṇas of Piśācas. . Airāvata had two bells named Vaijayantī Indra gave one of them to Viśākha and the other one to Skanda the standards of Skanda and Viśākha were red. Skanda, surrounded by troops of Piśācas and gods, sat on the golden mountain with the toys that had been given to him by the gods. Description of the Śveta mountain. . Then Śiva, with Pārvatī, rode in their shining chariot, yoked with, lions and managed by Kāla, to Bhadravaṭa they were preceded by Kubera with the Guhyakas, and followed by Indra and the gods in the right wing of his army was the great Yakṣa Amogha, with the Jṛmbhakas, Yakṣas, Rakṣases, Vasus, Rudras, etc. there was also Yama, with Mṛtyu, surrounded by hundreds of terrible diseases behind Yama the trident of Śiva, named Vijaya, surrounded by Varuṇa, with various aquatic animals the paṭṭiśa of Rudra surrounded by clubs, etc and followed by the umbrella of Rudra, and after this the water vessel, worshipped by the troops and maharṣis, and on the right side of this the sceptre, with Bhṛgus, Aṅgirases, and gods. Behind these rode Rudra in his white chariot, followed by rivers, etc. Apsarases, nakṣatras, planets, the children of the gods, etc and Parjanya. Soma held a white umbrella over his head, and Agni and Vāyu held the two fans. Behind him came Indra and the rājarṣis, and Gaurī, Vidyā, etc and the sciences . In the front the Rākṣasa graha advanced, holding the standard. The foremost of Yakṣas, Piṅgala, the friend of Rudra, who is always busy in places where corpses are burned, at one time was ahead of the army and at another behind it. Rudra is worshipped by mortals with virtuous actions in various forms. At the request of Śiva, Skanda took the command of the seventh army corps and was advised always to look up to Śiva, then he should attain great welfare. . Omens frightened Śiva, Pārvatī, the gods, and the Dānavas Indra encouraged the gods when about to flee the Dānava Mahiṣa crushed, of the gods with a mountain, put Indra and the gods to flight, and seized the pole of Rudras chariot, while heaven and earth groaned, etc and the maharṣis lost their senses, but Skanda killed him, cutting off his head that barred the entrance of sixteen yojanas, though the Uttara Kurus at present pass easily by that gate. The Dānavas fell in large numbers from the lance and arrows of Skanda the lance always returned to his hand again after killing thousands of enemies the pāriṣadas of Skanda devoured them and drank their blood. When the Dānavas were defeated, Skanda went to Śiva and was embraced and praised by Indra. Then Indra, with the gods, took leave from Śiva and left the place, and Rudra returned to Bhadravaṭa, after having recommended to the gods to render allegiance to Skanda just as to himself. In one day Skanda had killed the Dānavas and conqucred the three worlds .
Skandākṣa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Skandha, a serpent .
Skandharāja, v. Skandarāja.
Skandhaviśākha, v. Skandaviśākha.
. . The Pāriṣadas of Skanda When Skanda was struck with the thunderbolt, a number of male children were produced, who steal little children, whether born or in the womb, as also a number of female children. They ated Viśākha as their father. Bhadra śākha, with a face like that of a goat, in the battle protected his sons and daughters, in the presence of the mothers. Therefore they call Skanda Kumārapitṛ, and those who desire to have sons worship Rudra as Agni, and Umā as Svāhā . The daughters of the Tapa fire obtained from Skanda that they became the mothers of the whole world some of them should be good and some evil . Having ated Skanda as their son, the host of the mothers departed. Kākī, Halimā, etc. had, by the grace of Skanda, a terrible son Śiśu, who is named vīrāṣṭaka or, when the goats head is included, navaka . The sixth face of Skanda is that of a goat, the best of the six, honoured by the mothers, that by which Bhadraśākha created the divine energy . This happened on the fifth day of the bright half of the mouth, and on the sixth a terrific battle took place . . Description of Skanda. Śrī, embodied and looking like a lotus, rendered her allegiance to him. The brahmans and maharṣis praised him, saying Hiraṇyagarbha thou who wast born only six nights ago, thou become Indra, and at his request they explained to him the offices of Indra . Even Indra besought him to become the lord of the gods. But, at the request of Skanda, Indra retained his sovereignty, and, with all the gods, anointed Skanda as the leader of the celestial forces, and fastened the celestial wreath of gold, of Viśvakarmans manu facture, round his neck. Rudra came with Pārvatī and honoured him. Skanda is called the son of Rudra because Agni is called Rudra by brahmans, and because he was pro duced by Rudra entering Fire, and because he was honoured by Rudra before all the gods, and because the Śveta mountain, where he was reared by the Kṛttikās, was formed of Rudras semen virile. The red cock, given him by Agni, formed the ensign of Skanda, perched on the top of his chariot. The power which conduces to the victory of the gods, advanced before him. An innate armour entered into his body, and always manifests itself on the battle field. Under the recitation of holy texts he was honoured by G Aps Pś etc. Then he married Devasenā, Bṛh. performing the necessary prayers and oblations. Then Lakṣmī began to serve him. Therefore the fifth lunar day is called Śrī pañcamī, and the sixth a great tithi
. . Mārkanḍeya promised to tell the story of Kārttikeya, the son of Adbhuta, begotten of the wives of the Brahmarṣis. Formerly, when the Asuras always defeated the gods, Indra, anxious to find out a leader for the celestial host, repaired to the Mānasa mountain, and, hearing a woman crying for protection, rescued her from the Asura Keśin, whom he wounded and put to flight . She told Indra that she was Devasenā, daughter of Prajāpati, and that her sister Daityasenā had let herself be taken away by Keśin from the Mānasa mountain, where they used to sport with their female friends with the permission of Prajāpati. Indra said that she was a sisters daughter of his mother Dākṣāyaṇī. She asked Indra to select a husband for her, who was able to conquer the gods, Dānavas, Yakṣas, Kinnaras, Uragas, Rakṣas, and Daityas. Indra was grieved, thinking there was no such husband for her. . Then Indra perceived the Sun rising from the Udaya hill, and Soma entering the Sun on the amāvasyā at the Raudra muhūrta, and the gods and Asuras fighting on the Udaya mountain, the morning twilight tinged with red clouds, the Sea blood red Bhṛgus and Aṅgirases offered oblations, and Agni took the oblations and entered the Sun, whilst the Sun was entering the twenty fourth parvan, and Sindhu was flowing with a current of fresh blood, etc. Indra thought that, if now Soma or Agni gave birth to a son, this son might become the husband of Devasenā. Then he repaired with Devasenā to the world of Brahmán, who promised that it should be as Indra had thought. Then Indra. with Devasenā, repaired to the place where the devarṣis Vasiṣṭha, etc. lived, and the gods also came thither to drink soma and receive their shares of offerings, and the Adbhuta fire came from the solar disc to the āhavanīya and made over the offerings to the gods. He, then saw the wives of the ṛṣis sleeping in their āśramas and fell in love. In order to look at them daily, he entered the gārhapatya fire, and dwelt there for a long time, and at last, from despair, repaired to a forest in order to away with himself. Svāhā, daughter of Dakṣa, who had in vain loved Adbhuta, now resolved upon assuming the guise of the wives of the seven ṛṣis . Svāhā first gratified her desire in the guise of Śivā, the wife of Aṅgiras, and then, lest somebody should unduly suspect the brāhmaṇa ladies, she went out of the forest in the guise of a bird, and on the Śveta mountain, that was covered with clumps of reeds and guarded with seven headed poisonous serpents, rākṣasas, Piśācas, etc she threw the semen, which she held in her hand, into a golden basin. Then, assuming successively the form of five of the others, she did the same on the first lunar day . Only the form of Arundhatī she was unable to assume because of her ascetic merit and devotion to her husband. The semen produced a child, whom the ṛṣis called Skanda, with six heads, etc. On the second day it first assumed a form, on the rd it looked like a little child, on the fourth the limbs were developed. Seizing the bow used by the destroyer of Tripura, Skanda uttered a terrible roar, so that the great nāgas Citra and Airāvata sprang up. But Skanda seized them with two of his hands, and holding a dart in one hand, a cock in another, etc and blowing a conch shell, he terrified the creatures with his roars. The persons of various orders, who then sought the protection of Skanda, are called his followers by the brahmans . Discharging his arrows in the direction of the Śveta mountain, he rent asunder the mountain Krauñca, the son of Himavat therefore the swans and vultures go to the mountain Meru. The other mountains also screamed aloud. Then, with his lance, he rent in twain one of the peaks of the Śveta mountain. Mount Śveta and the other mountains left the Earth and fled the Earth was torn asunder on all sides she went to Skanda and regained her power the mountains bowed n to Skanda and came back to the Earth, and all creatures worshipped Skanda on the fifth day of the lunar month . . Terrific prodigies were seen everywhere. The ṛṣis tried to restore tranquillity to the universe. The inhabitants of the Caitra ratha forest accused the wives of the six ṛṣis, other ones the fowl of being the cause thereof but nobody suspected Svāhā. The seven ṛṣis divorced their wives with the exception of Arundhatī, though Svāhā claimed the child as hers. Viśvāmitra, having concluded the sacrifice of the seven ṛṣis, had secretly followed the god of fire, and knew everything as it had happened. He sought the protection of Skanda, and performed for him the thirteen auspicious rites of childhood the jālakarman, etc etc. Though Viśvāmitra informed the seven ṛṣis of the innocence of their wives, yet they abaned them unconditionally. . The gods asked Indra to kill Skanda, but he dared not attack him, saying that Skanda was able to destroy even the Creator of the world. Then they let the Mothers of the world approach in order to kill Skanda, but they ated him as their son and let him suck their breasts, especially the daughter of Krodha with a spike in her hand, and the daughter of the Red Sea, who lived on blood and his father Agni came and, transformed into Naigameya with a goats month, gratified him with toys .
Smara = Kāma, .
Smṛti . u, .
Snehana = Śiva .
Sodha, pl a people .
Soma1, originally the soma juice, generally identified with the Moon obtained the religion of Nārāyaṇa from the VaikhānasasTārakavadhop.Candramāḥ, gave a sheep to Skandasutā TārādhipasyevaUmā Maheśvarasaṃv.Rohiṇī Śaśinaḥ sādhvī
Soma2 = Sūrya, . Do. = Skanda, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Somā, an Apsaras .
Somabhojana, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Somāśrama, a tīrtha .
Somaśravas, a brahman, son of Śrutaśravas .
Somāśrāyāyaṇa, a tīrtha .
Somadatta, a prince . e, . Bālhika, Bālhikātmaja, Kaurava, Kauraveya, Kauravya, Kurupuṅgava.
Somadattasuta = Bhūriśravas, . Somadatta, .
Somadatti v. Saumadatti.
Somadheya, pl a people .
Somagiri, a mountain .
Somaka, an ancient king, son of Sahadeva . Sāhadevi.
Somaka, pl a tribe or family of the Pāñcālas, often used synonymous with these, but also mentioned together with them . d, ʹ, .
Somaka, sg. = Janamejaya the Pāñcāla
Somakīrti, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Somakula .
Somaloka . ff, . n, . . b, .
Somānvaya . b, . Somakula, Somavaṃśa.
Somapa1, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Somapa2, a Viśvadeva .
Somapa3 = Viṣṇu .
Somapā = Śiva .
Somapāḥ, a class of pitṛs or ṛṣis . b, . b, . b, .
Somapada, a tīrtha .
Somapīthin . o Gautama said There where Rathantara and Bṛhat are sung, where one strews the altar for puṇḍarīkas, where the drinker of soma comes with steeds, .
Somapura .
Somaputra = Varcas, .
Somaputrī = Jyots nākālī, .
Somasūnu = Abhimanyu, .
Somatīrtha, name of various tīrthas .
Somātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Somavaktra = Śiva, .
Somavaṃśa . b, odbhavaḥ, sc. Nahuṣa
Somavaṃśīya = Bhīma sena, .
Somavarcas, a Viśvadeva .
Somavāyavyāḥ, pl a class of ṛṣis, .
Somavīthī, v. Somapīthin.
Sparśa .
Sparśāśana, pl a class of gods .
Spaṣṭākṣara = Viṣṇu .
Sphoṭana = Śiva .
Sragvin = Viṣṇu .
Sraja, a Viśvadeva .
Sraṣṭṛ = Sūrya, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sruvahasta = Śiva, .
Sṛñjaya1, one or more ancient kings . Cf, Sṛñjaya.
Sṛñjaya2, one of the standard bearers of Jayadratha .
Sṛñjaya3, father of Suvarṇaṣṭhīvin. There was a king of the name Śaibya, his son was S. the ṛṣis Nārada and Parvata were the friends of S. Seeing the daughter of S Parvata asked if she was Śrī, etc. . Nārada obtained her as his wife. Parvata cursed Nārada, saying that he should not go to heaven at his will, and Nārada cursed Parvata, saying that he should not go to heaven without him. Meanwhile, king S desirous of a son, prevailed upon the brahmans to ask Nārada on his behalf, and, urged by Nārada, he prayed for a son possessed of every accomplishment, and whose urine, etc. should be of gold. This son was named Suvarṇaṣṭhīvin, and increased the wealth beyond all limits . Some robbers seized the prince and slew him, and cut his body into fragments but without finding any gold. The robbers then slew one another and sank into an unimaginably awful hell. To Sṛñjaya, who was afflicted with deep sorrow, the . ṛ. Nārada told the Ṣoḍaśarājika, i.e the histories of sixteen kings who had died, ending each narrative with the words as he died who was superior to thee and to thy son, thou shouldst not grieve for the latter who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial present. . The grief of Sṛñjaya was dispelled and Nārada restored his son to life, .
Sṛñjaya4 = Hotravāhana, .
Sṛñjaya5 = Uttamaujas, .
Sṛñjaya6, vide Sañjaya .
Sṛñjaya, pl a tribe or family among the Pāñcālas, often used synonymous with these, but also mentioned together with them .
Sṛṣṭi, a goddess .
Sṛṣṭikṛt = Brahmán, .
Stambamitra, a śārṅgaka, son of Mandapala and Jaritā .
Stanakuṇḍa, sg. and pl name of a tīrtha .
Stanapoṣika or Stanayoṣika, pl a people .
Stavapriya = Viṣṇu .
Stavarāja, .
Stavya = Viṣṇu .
Stena, pl name of a caste, .
Sthānada = Viṣṇu .
Sthaṇḍileyu, a prince .
Sthāṇu1, name of a Rudra .
Sthāṇu2 = Śiva, q.v. Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sthāṇutīrtha, name of a tīrtha. p, .
Sthāṇuvaṭa, a tīrtha .
Sthāvara = Viṣṇu .
Sthāvarāṇāṃ patiḥ = Śiva .
Sthavira1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sthaviṣṭha = Viṣṇu .
Sthaviṣṭhaḥ sthavīyasāṃ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Sthira1, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Sthira2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sthita = Śiva .
Sthūla1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sthūlabāluka v. Sthūlavāluka.
Sthūlaśiras, a ṛṣi . b, maharṣiḥ, cursed the trees, saying that they should not put forth flowers at all timesĀnuśāsanik.v.l. Sthūlagirāḥ, B. came to see Bhīṣma
Sthūlajīrṇāṅgajaṭila = Śiva .
Sthūlakarṇa, Sthūlākarṇa, v. Sthūṇ.
Sthūlakeśa, a ṛṣi .
Sthūlākṣa, a ṛṣi .
Sthūlavālukā, a river . m, .
Sthūṇa1, name of a Yakṣa . Sthūnakarṇa.
Sthūṇa2, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Sthūṇakarṇa, a brahman .
Sthūṇākarṇa, name of a weapon .
Sthūṇākarṇa2 = Sthūṇa1, .
Stobha, name of a certain sacrificial exclamation, .
Stotra = Viṣṇu .
Stotrātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Stotṛ = Viṣṇu .
Strī = Śiva .
Strīparvan, the book of the Mhbhr . c, .
Strīrājya, sg. name of a country, or pl. a people .
Strīrājyādhipati = Śṛgāla, .
Strīvilāpa .
. Aided by the spiritual sight granted by Vyāsa, Gāndhārī beheld the field of battle, though distant, from the spot where she stood, with Rā Pś jackals, etc. Dhṛtarāṣṭra, at the command of Vyāsa, with the Pāṇḍavas, with Kṛṣṇa and all the Kuru ladies, proceeded to the field of battle. The Pāñcāla and the Kuru ladies were plunged into unutterable distress, described by the daughter of Subala, i.e. Gāndhārī, to Kṛṣṇa, mentioning Bhīṣma, etc. then her eyes fell upon Duryodhana . Gāndhārīs lament at the sight of Duryodhana of her sons and daughters in law, etc especially Duḥśāsana of Vikarṇa, etc. of Abhimanyu, etc directing Kṛṣṇas attention to the laments of Uttarā of Karṇa of the lord of the Avantis, etc Jayadratha, and Duḥśalā of Śalya, Bhīṣma, etc and Droṇa, whose disciples, with Kṛpī, were burning his body on the bank of the Gaṅgā of Somadatta and Bhūriśravas, and the mother and wives of Bhūriśravas, and Śakuni of the Kāmboja king, etc. . Then Gāndhārī cursed Kṛṣṇa for not having prevented the slaughter of the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas, saying on the thirty sixth year from this thou shalt, after causing the slaughter of thy kinsmen, etc perish in a disgraceful way within the wilderness, etc. Kṛṣṇa said there is none in the world, save myself, who is capable of exterminating the Vṛṣṇis am endeavouring to bring it about in proclaiming this curse, thou hast aided me in the accomplish ment of that task The Pāṇḍavas became stupefied .
Stubha, name of a fire .
Stuta = Śiva, .
Stuti = Viṣṇu .
stutiśāstra, pl .
Stutya = Śiva, .
Stūyamāna = Śiva, .
Subabhru = Kṛṣṇa, .
Subāhu1, a serpent .
Subāhu2, an Apsaras .
Subāhu3, various kings at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira . Subāhu5, Subāhu8 .
Subāhu4, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. .
Subāhu5, a Kāśi king .
Subāhu6, a Cedi king at the time of Nala . Cedipati, Cedirāja.
Subāhu7, king of the Kulindas . Kirātarājan, Kulindādhipati.
Subāhu8, a Kuru warrior .
Subāhu9, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Subāhu1, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Subāhu1, an ancient king .
Subandhanavimocana, Subāndhava = Śiva .
Subala1, an ancient king .
Subala2, king of the Gāndhāras and father of Śakuni and Gāndhārī . Gāndhā rarāja.
Subala3, a king .
Subala4, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Subala5 = Śiva .
Subaladāyāda = Kālikeya
Subalaja = Śakuni, q.v.
Subalajā = Gāndhārī, q.v.
Subalaputra, Subalatmaja = Śakuni, q.v.
Subalātmajā = Gāndhārī, q.v.
Subalātmaja, pl. .
Subhā, wife of Aṅgiras .
Subhadra, name of a place.
Subhadrā, daughter of Vasudeva, wife of Arjuna, and mother of Abhimanyu . also the following synonyms Abhimanyujananī, . Bhadrā, . Mādhavī, Sātvatātmajā, Sātvatī, Vārṣneyī, Vāsudevasahodarā Vasudevasutā, Yādavī, Yadunandanī, q.v.
Subhadrā, name of a, cow .
Subhadrāharaṇa, .
. Some days afterwards a mountain festival of the Bhojas, Vṛṣṇis, and Andhakas was held on the Raivataka mountain there Haladhara with Revatī, followed by Gandharvas, king Ugrasena, with his wives, Raukmiṇeya, Śāmba, Akrūra, Sāraṇa, Gada, Babhru, Vidūratha, Niśaṭha, Cārudeṣṇa, Pṛthu, Vipṛthu, Satyaka, Sātyaki, Bhaṅgakāra, Mahārava, Hārdikya, Uddhava, etc were present Arjuna fell in love with Subhadrā, the favourite daughter of Vasudeva, the sister of Kṛṣṇa, and uterine sister of Sāraṇa. Kṛṣṇa told him to carry her away by force, as the result of a svayaṃvara was btful. They sent a courier to Yudhiṣṭhira at Indraprastha, and obtained his assent . Arjuna set out as for a hunting expedi tion in his chariot, yoked with Śaibya and Sugrīva, and carried away Subhadrā towards Indraprastha. The soldiers ran to Dvārakā to the sabhā, named Sudharmā, and informed the sābhāpāla, who, by blowing the drum of alarm caused the Vṛṣṇis, Andhakas, and Bhojas to assemble at the sabhā. While they made a loud uproar, Baladeva restored silence by saying that they ought first to hear what Kṛṣṇa purposed. Then, seeing Kṛṣṇa sitting silent, he spoke angrily about this deed of Arjuna .
Subhaga, brother of Śakuni v. b .
Subhagā, an Apsaras, daughter of Prādhā .
Subhagā, a mātṛ. u, .
Subhava, a king .
Subhīma, a god .
Subhrāj .
Subhrāja, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Subhrū, a mātṛ. u, .
Subhuja = Viṣṇu .
Subhūmika, a tīrtha on the Sarasvatī. c In that tīrtha many Aps are sporting . and G. repair thither every month it is the resort of Brahmán himself G. and diverse tribes of Aps. are to be seen there, passing the time happily . and P. sport there in joy, sacred flowers being strewn over them Baladeva heard the sound of those celestial songs and musical instruments, and saw many shas of G and Rā .
Subhūmikā = Subhūmika, .
Subīja = Śiva .
Sucakra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Sucandra1, an Asura .
Sucandra2, a Devagandharva .
Sucāru1, son of Kṛṣṇa and Rakmiṇī .
Sucāru2, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sucetas, a brahman, son of Gṛtsamada. b, .
Suchattra = Śiva .
sūcī, name of a vyūha, .
sūcīmukha, name of a vyūha, .
Sūcīroman = Śiva .
Sucitra1, a serpent .
Sucitra2, one or more kings .
Sucitra3, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sūcīvaktra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Suśānta = Śiva, .
Suśārada = Śiva .
Suśarman1, king of the Trigartas . Prastha lādhipa, Prasthalādhipati, Rukmaratha, Traigarta, Trigarta, Trigartādhipati, Trigartarāj, Trigartarāja, Trigartarājan.
Suśarman2, a Pāṇḍava warrior . next.
Suśarman3, a Pāñcāla prince .
Suśobhanā, daughter of the frog king Āyu and wife of king Parikṣit of Ayodhyā .
Suśravā, daughter of a Vidarbha king .
Suśruta, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Sudakṣiṇa1, a Kāmboja prince . Kāmboja, Kāmbojarāja.
Sudakṣiṇa2, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Sudāmā, name of two māṭrs. u, .
Sudāman1, a king .
Sudāman2, king of the Daśārṇas .
Sūdāman, pl a people .
Sudarśa1, a Kuru warrior . next.
Sudarśa2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . the prec.
Sudarśana1, the discus of Viṣṇu . d Kṛṣṇas discus was given to him by Mahādeva when the latter had slain a Daitya who lived in the water. Originally it was created by Vṛṣāṅka . Only Pinākin can gaze at it. Bhava gave it the name Sudarśana, . Cakra .
Sudarśana2, a prince .
Sudarśana3, the chariot of Indra .
Sudarśana4, a prince . c, .
Sudarśana5, name of a dvīpa = Jambudvīpa .
Sudarśana6, the Jambu tree on Meru. i, . Sudarśanā.
Sudarśana7, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sudarśana8, a Kuru warrior.
Sudarśana9, a Pāṇḍava warrior.
Sudarśana1, a Mālava king . Mālava.
Sudarśana1, son of Agni and Sudarcanā. b, . Āgneya Agniputra, Pāvakasuta, Pāvaki.
Sudarśana1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sudarśanā, daughter of king Duryodhana of Māhiṣmatī and the river Narmadā. b, . Duryodhanasutā
Sudarśanā = Sudarśana5, .
. b . Bhīṣma said Prajāpati Manu Ikṣvāku sons the tenth of those, Daśāśva, became the king of Māhiṣmatī Daśāśvas son was the pious Madirāśva Dyutimat Suvīra Sudurjaya R ṛ Duryodhana, in whose king there was no miser, etc and who was learned in the Vedas and Vedānta. Duryodhana begat the beautiful Sudarśanā upon the river Narmadā Agni, taking the shape of a brahman, demanded her hand from the king, who would not give her to him then Agni vanished from his great sacrifice. Duryodhana repaired to the brahmans, who became informed of the matter by Agni then the king consented, and Agni gave, as a marriage er, the boon to the king that he would always remain there, and Agni has always been present there to this and was seen by Sahadeva on his digvijaya. She bore to Agni the beautiful Sudarśana, who, even in his childhood, knew Bráhman. Sudarśana married Oghavatī, the daughter of king Oghavat and the sister of Ogharatha, and dwelt in Kurukṣetra he took the vow of conquering death by leading the life of a householder. He instructed Oghavatī that, for pleasing a guest, she must not spare even her own person. One when Sudarśana went out to fetch firewood, a graceful brahman came to Oghavatī and required and obtained her own person. Mṛtyu, with his iron club, was always at the side of Sudarśana, watching him in order to find out his flaws. When Sudarśana came home he showed no anger. The brahman turned out to be Dharma, who was pleased with Sudarśana, and said you have conquered Mṛtyu Oghavatī has been protected from defilement by your virtue and by her own chastity you will attain to all the worlds in this your body, and, as yoga is in the control of Oghavatī, she will follow you with half her corporeal self, being with the other half Oghavatī. Then Indra came, riding in a fine chariot, and approached that brahman.
Sudāsa, king of the Kośalas .
Sudella, pl v. Sudeṣṇa, pl.
Sudeṣṇa, pl a people .
Sudeṣṇā, wife of the Aṅga king Bali .
Sudeṣṇā, wife of Virāṭa . Kaikeyī.
Sudeṣṭa, pl a people .
Sudeva1, a brahman .
Sudeva2, the generalissimo of Ambarīṣa .
Sudeva3, king of the Kāśis. b, . Kāśinandana, Kāśirāja.
Sudevā, an Aṅga princess .
Sudevā, a Dāśārha princess .
Sudevatanaya = Divodāsa, .
sudhā, a delicious drink or nectarlike substance, .
Sudhanus, a Kuru warrior .
Sudhanvan1, a brahman of Aṅgiras race . b, . b, . Āṅgirasa.
Sudhanvan2, a Kuru warrior . Sudhanus.
Sudhanvan3, a Pāñcāla prince . Pāñcālya.
Sudhanvan4, an ancient king .
Sudhanvan5 = Viṣṇu .
Sudharmā, the sabhā of the Daśārhas, .
Sudharmā, wife of Mātalī .
Sudharman1, a Vṛṣṇi prince .
Sudharman2, king of the Daśārṇas. .
Sudharman3, a Kuru warrior .
Sudharman4, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Sudharman5 .
Sudharman6, v. Suśarman2.
Sudhāvat, v. Svadhāvat.
Sudina, a tīrtha .
Sudivātaṇḍi, a ṛṣi .
Sudṛṣṭa, pl a people .
Suduścara = Skanda, .
Sudurjaya, king of Māhiṣmatī, . b, . Durjaya.
Sudyumna, an ancient king, son of Manu Vaivasvata . b, .
Sugaṇā, a mātṛ. u, .
Sugandha, name of a tīrtha .
Sugandhā, an Apsaras .
Sugandhā, a tīrtha .
Sugāndhāra = Śiva .
Sughoṣa, the conch of Nakula .
Sughoṣa2 = Viṣṇu .
Sugoptṛ, a Viśvadeva .
Sugrīva1, one of Kṛṣṇas horses . also Śaibya Sugrīvavāhana .
Sugrīva2, a monkey chief in Kiṣkindhā, brother of Vālin, . Sūryaputra.
Suhanu, an Asura .
Suhara, an Asura .
Suhasta, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Suhavis, son of Bhumanyu .
Suḥśala, v. Duḥśala.
Suhma, a prince .
Suhma, pl a people .
Suhotra1, an ancient king, son of Bhumanyu . King S. was invincible in battle, etc the very gods used to come to see him he freed the earth from Mlecchas and forest thieves Parjanya showered gold to him from years end to years end the rivers were gold in those olden days and were open to the use of everybody his tanks were a krośa in extension that unlimited wealth of gold the rājarṣi S. gave away to the brahmans at a sacrifice at Kurujāṅgala he performed horse sacrifices, rājasūyas, many kṣatriya sacrifices, etc and attained to a desirable end, . b, . Atithin.
Suhotra2, son of Sahadeva Pāṇḍava .
Suhotra3, a brahman .
Suhotra4, a Kuru king . Kaurava, Kauravya.
Suhotra5, a Daitya. b, .
Suhotṛ, son of Bhumanyu .
Suhṛd = Viṣṇu .
Suhṛda = Śiva .
Sujāta, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sujātā, daughter of Uddālaka, wife of Kaḥoda, and mother of Aṣṭāvakra .
Sukandaka, pl a people .
Sukanyā, daughter of Śaryāti and wife of Cyavana . Śaryātitanayā.
Sukanyā, wife of Mātariśvan. j, .
. . Lomaśa related When Cyavana, the son of the maharṣi Bhṛgu practised austerities by the side of this lake, and, assuming the posture vīrasthāna, had been enveloped by an anthill, king Śaryāti came to the lake with his, wives and his only daughter Sukanyā. The viprarṣi Cyavana, seeing Sukanyā, was gladdened and spoke to her, but she did not hear him. Then Sukanyā, seeing his eyes in the anthill, pierced them with thorns from curiosity. He, becoming very angry, obstructed the excre ments and urine of Śaryātis soldiers, and Śaryāti at last discovered the cause of their distress, and only obtained deliverance therefrom by bestowing Sukanyā upon Cyavana. Then Śaryāti, with his troops, went to his city, and Sukanyā remained with Cyavana . Once, when the Aśvins had seen Sukanyā, after she had bathed, they asked her to choose one of them for her husband, and as she refused, they entered the water together with Cyavana, and when they all came out of the tank young and beautiful they asked her to choose one of them and she choose Cyavana. Cyavana promised them to make them drinkers of soma in the presence of Indra. Then the Aśvins, highly delighted, ascended to heaven . When Śaryāti heard that Cyavana had been turned into a youth, he came with his wife and troops to see him, and became very glad. Cyavana caused him to perform a sacrifice with Cyavana as his priest. When Cyavana was about to take up soma in order to offer it to the Aśvins, Indra forbade it, saying, that they were physicians and servants, assumed forms at pleasure, and roamed about in the world of mortals, and as Cyavana did not obey he prepared to hurl his thunderbolt at him, but Cyavana paralysed his arm and fulfilled his intention. Then he created a kṛtyā, a great Asura named Mada this rushed forth to devour Indra, who only was delivered when he had sanctioned that the Aśvins should henceforth be entitled to the soma juice, saying that he had only intended to spread the fame of Cyavana and Śaryāti. Cyavana dis tributed Mada in drinks, women, gambling, and hunting.
Sukarman, a prince .
Sukeśī, an Apsaras. b, .
Suketu1, a prince .
Suketu2, son of Śiśupāla .
Suketu3, son of Citraketu .
Sukhada = Viṣṇu .
Sukhadā, a mātṛ. u, .
Sukhājāta = Śiva .
Sukhaprada = Mahāpuruṣa .
Sukhapradā = Devasenā, .
Sukhāsakta = Śiva .
Sukhasecaka, a serpent .
Sukratu1, an ancient king .
Sukratu2, a prince .
Sukṣatra, son of the Kosala king .
Sūkṣma1, an Asura .
Sūkṣma2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sūkṣmaṃ tapas tatparamaṃ = Skanda, .
Sūkṣmātman1 = Sūrya, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Śiva .
Sukumāra1, a serpent .
Sukumāra2, one or more princes .
Sukumāra3, a Kāśi prince .
Sukumāra4, a varṣa in Śākadvīpa. b
Sukumārī, a river in Śākadvīpa. b, .
Sukumārī, daughter of Sṛñjaya. b, .
Sukuṇḍala, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sukusumā, a mātṛ. u, .
Sukuṭṭa, pl a people .
Sukuṭya, pl a people .
Sulabha = Viṣṇu .
Sulabhā, a female mendicant. b, .
Sulabhā Janaka saṃvāda . b . Bhīṣma related the old narrative of the discourse in days of yore, in Dharma yuga, between king Janaka Maithila Dharmadhvaja, whom many wise men desired to imitate, and the female mendicant Sulabhā, who practised Yoga and wandered over the Earth, and had heard from many tridaṇḍins about Janaka. By her Yoga power she assumed a beautiful form and instantly repaired to Mithilā, and, on pretence of begging alms, presented herself before the king, who was surrounded by his ministers and learned scholars. By Yoga she entered the kings consciousness by her own consciousness . Then they conversed upon emancipation. The king said he was a disciple of the bhikṣu Pañcaśikha of Parāśaras race, and fully conversant with Sāṅkhya and Yoga, etc. Pañcaśikha had dwelt with him for four months in the rainy season. Sulabhā enumerated thirty principles. Sulabhā was the daughter of R ṛ Pradhāna in the sacrifices of her ancestors Indra used to come with Droṇa, etc. no suitable husband could be obtained for her therefore, she wandered over the earth alone, observant of the practices of asceticism. Sulabhā dwelt this one night in his person like a mendicant in an empty house .
Sulocana1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sulocana2 = Viṣṇu .
Sumahābala, an ancient king .
Sumahāsvana = Śiva .
Sumāla, pl a people .
Sumallika, pl a people .
Sumana, a Gandharva .
Sumanā, a Kaikeyī .
Sumanas1, a king.
Sumanas2, an ancient king .
Sumanas3, an Asura .
Sumaṇḍala, a king .
Sumaṅgalā, a mātṛ. u, .
Sumaṇi, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Sumanomukha, a serpent .
Sumantu, a ṛṣi, disciple of Vyāsa . b, .
Sumanyu1, a Devagandharva .
Sumanyu2, v. Bhūmanyu.
Sumati1, an Asura .
Sumati2, a ṛṣi .
Sumedhas = Viṣṇu .
Sumeru = Meru, .
Sumīḍha, a prince .
Sumitra1, an ancient king .
Sumitra2, one or more kings at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira .
Sumitra3, a muni .
Sumitra4, a god .
Sumitra5, the charioteer of Abhimanyu . Sūtaja.
Sumitra6, a Haihaya king .
Sumitrā, wife of Daśaratha .
Sumukha1, a serpent .
Sumukha2, one or more Suparṇas, sons of Garuḍa . b The bird S the son of Suparṇa beholding that all the birds on Meru were of golden plumage, resolved to leave that mountain as there was no difference there between good, middling, and bad birds, .
Sumukha3, a ṛṣi .
Sumukha4, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sumukha5 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sumukhī, an Apsaras. b, .
Sunābha1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Sunābha2, a counsellor of Varuṇa .
Sunābha3, a mountain .
Sunakṣatrā, a mātṛ. u, .
Sunāman1, son of Suketu .
Sunāman2, brother of Kaṃsa .
Sunāman3, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa.
Sunāman4, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Sunandā, wife of Sarvabhauma .
Sunandā, daughter of Sarvasena, wife of Bharata .
Sunandā, wife of Pratīpa . Śaibyā.
Sunandā, sister of the Cedi king Subāhu .
Sunasā, a river .
Sunaya, pl a people .
Sunda1, an Asura, brother of Upasunda . Asura, Daitya, Daityendra .
Sunda2 = Viṣṇu .
Sundara = Viṣṇu .
Sundaravaṃśa, pl a people .
Sundarikāhrada, a tīrtha. i, . next.
Sundarikātīrtha, name of a tīrtha .
. . Nārada related In days of yore the Daitya Nikumbha of the race of Hiraṇyakaśipu had two sons, Sunda and Upasunda, who always shared with each other happiness as well as woe, and never went anywhere unless together. Desirous of subjugating the three worlds, they practised terrible penances on the mountain Vindhya, which, by the power of their austerities at last began to emit vapour. In vain the gods repeatedly tempted them by means of every precious possession and beautiful girls, and by illusion, causing their sisters, mothers, wives, etc to appear pursued by a rākṣasa and imploring their help. When Brahmán granted them a boon, they asked to become immortal, which he refused, granting them instead that they should not need to be afraid of anything except each other, etc. They now desisted from their asceticism and returned to their abode, where they lived happy, causing even the moon to rise over their city every night, even out of season . They set out to conquer the three worlds in the night under the constellation of Maghāḥ, with a large Daitya force cased in mail, etc. The gods sought refuge in Brahmaloka, and the Daityas subjugated Indraloka, and van quished the tribes of the Yakṣas and Rakṣases, and the Khecaras, and the Nāgas in the earth, and the tribes of the Mlecchas dwelling in the ocean. In order to extinguish the sacrifices that strengthened the gods, they slew those that were performing sacrifices and the assistant brahmans, etc. Then they took up their abode in Kurukṣetra . The Devarṣis and Siddhas and ṛṣis were affected with great grief, and went to the abode of Pitāmaha, seated with the gods, the Siddhas, and the Brahmarṣis, Mahādeva, Agni, Vāyu, the sun and moon, Śakra, the Pārameṣṭhya ṛṣis, the Vaikhānasas, the Vālakhilyas, the Vānaprasthas, the Marīcipas, the Ajas, the Avimūḍhas, etc. Brahmán sent Tilottamā to them . She came to Sunda and Upasunda as they were sporting in the Vindhya mountains, and from jealousy they struck each other to death with their maces. And Pitāmaha then came there with the gods and the great ṛṣis, and granted to Tilottamā that she should roam in the region of the Ādityas. Then, bestowing the three worlds on Indra as before, he returned to his own region.
Sunetra1, a prince .
Sunetra2, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Suniścala = Śiva .
Sunītha1, name of a mantra .
Sunītha2 = Śiśupāla .
Sunītha3, an ancient ṛṣi .
Sunītha4, name of two ancient kings .
Sunītha5, son of Kṛṣṇa and Jāmbavatī .
Sunīthā, daughter of Mṛtyu .
Supārśva1, one or more kings at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira .
Supārśva2, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Suparṇa1 = Garuḍa, .
Suparṇa2, name of two Devagandharvas .
Suparṇa3, an Asura .
Suparṇa4 = Sūrya, .
Suparṇa5, name of a yajus .
Suparṇa6, a ṛṣi. b, ṛṣiḥlearnt the religion from Nārāyaṇa himself, and recited it thrice a hence it was named trisauparṇa
Suparṇa7 = Viṣṇu .
Suparṇa8, name of a vyūha . Garuḍa2.
Suparṇa, pl birds of Garuḍas race Garuḍa, pl.
Suparṇaketu = Kṛṣṇa, .
suparṇī, said of Svāhā, .
Suparvaṇa = Śiva, .
Suprabhā, a river, one of the seven Sarasvatīs. i, .
Suprabhā, a mātṛ. u, .
Suprabhā, daughter of Vadānya. b, .
Suprajā, wife of the fire Bhānu .
Suprajāpati = Mahāpuruṣa .
Suprasāda1, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Suprasāda2 = Viṣṇu .
Suprasādā, a mātṛ .
Supratardana, an ancient king .
Supratīka1, an ancient king .
Supratīka2, the elephant of Bhagadatta .
Supratīka3, a ṛṣi, brother of Vibhāvasu. b When the ṛṣi S. wished to separate from his elder brother Vibhāvasu and make a partition of their patrimony he was cursed by Vibhāvasu, who said Thou shalt become an elephant, and he himself cursed Vibhāvasu, saying Thou shalt become a tortoise. In these forms they continued their hostilities in a lake the elephant being yojanas in height and in circumference, and the tortoise and respectively, .
Supratīka4, one of the elephants of the quarters . c, .
Supratima, an ancient king .
Supratiṣṭhā, a mātr. u, .
Supravṛddha, one of the standard bearers of Jayadratha .
Suprayogā, a river .
Supriyā, an Apsaras .
Supuṇḍraka, v. Puṇḍraka.
Supuṇyā, v. Puṇyā.
sura, mostly pl. . Sura śatru, etc.
Sūra, pl v. Śūra8.
Surā, a goddess .
Surabhi or Surabhī, the celestial cow, mother of kine . b, . g, . b, . b, . Dākṣāyaṇī. Do. pl .
Surabhi = Śiva .
Surabhimat, name of a fire .
Surabhīpaṭṭana, a city .
Surabhyākhyāna .
Suraśatru, pl. = Asura, pl . Do. sg .
Suraśreṣṭha1 = Brahmán, .
Suraśreṣṭha2 = Śiva, .
Suraśreṣṭha3 = Indra, .
Suraśreṣṭha4 = Nārāyaṇa, .
Suraśreṣṭha5 = Skanda, .
Suraśreṣṭha6 = Sūrya, .
Suraśreṣṭhā = Durgā, .
Surādevī, v. Surā.
Surādhipa1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Nahuṣa, q.v. Do. pl .
Surādhyakṣa1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Suradviṣ, pl. = Asura, pl . Do. sg .
Suragaṇa = Śiva .
Suragaṇaśreṣṭha = Viṣṇu, .
Suragaṇeśvara = Indra, q.v.
Suraghātin = Vṛtra, .
Suraguru1 = Brahmán, .
Suraguru2 = Bṛhaspati, .
Suraguru3 = Viṣṇu, .
Surajā, an Apsaras .
Sūrakṛt, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Suraloka, .
Suramat, name of a fire .
Surāmukha, a serpent .
Suranadī = Gaṅgā, .
Surānāṃ hantṛ, a god .
= Indra, .
Surānanda = Viṣṇu .
Suranātha = Viṣṇu, .
Surapati1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Nahuṣa, q.v. Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Surapravīra, a god .
Surapuṅgava = Indra q.v.
Surapura .
Surarāj = Indra, q.v. .
Surarāja1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Surarājaputra = Arjuna, .
Surāri, a king .
Surāri, pl. = Asura, pl . Do sg .
Surārighna = Viṣṇu, .
Surārihan1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Surarṣarbha1 = Indra, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Skanda, .
Surarṣi, pl. = Devarṣi, pl . Do. sg. = Nārada, bis, .
Surasa, a serpent .
Surasā, the mother of the serpents .
Surasā, an Apsaras .
Surasattama1 = Brahmán, .
Surasattama2 = Śiva, .
Surasattama3 = Garuḍa, .
Surasattama4 = Indra, .
Surasattama5 = Viṣṇu, .
Sūrasena, pl v. Śūrasena.
Surāṣṭra, pl a people .
Surāṣṭrādhipati = Ākṛti, .
Surāṣṭraka, pl. = Surāṣṭra, pl .
Surasūnu = Arjuna, .
Surāsura, adj . Devāsura.
Surāsuraguru1 = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Surāsurapati = Brahmán, .
Surāsureśa = Śiva, .
Suratā, an Apsaras .
Suratha1, a prince .
Suratha2, an ancient king .
Suratha3, the father of Koṭikāsya .
Suratha4, a Trigarta king, follower of Jayadratha .
Suratha5, a Kuru warrior .
Suratha6, a son of Drupada .
Suratha7, a Pāñcāla prince .
Suratha8, son of Jayadratha .
Surathākāra, a varṣa in Kuśadvīpa .
Surāva, name of a horse .
Suravara = Śiva, .
Suravarcas, a god .
Suravarottama = Viṣṇu, .
Suravidviṣ, pl. = Asura, pl .
Suravīthī .
Sureśa1 = Agni, .
Sureśa2 = Brahmán, .
Sureśa3 = Śiva, .
Sureśa4 = Indra, .
Sureśa5 = Viṣṇu, .
Sureśa6 = Yama, .
Sureśa7, a Viśvadeva .
Sureśa8, v. Suveśa.
Sureśvara1 = Agni, .
Sureśvara2 = Śiva, .
Sureśvara3 = Indra, .
Sureśvara4 = Nahuṣa, .
Sureśvara5 = Nara, .
Sureśvara6 = Viṣṇu, .
Sureśvara7, a Rudra .
Sureśvarī = Durga, .
Surendra1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Nahuṣa, q.v. Do. = Śiva, .
Surendraloka = Indraloka, .
Sureṇu, a river, one of the seven Sarasvatīs. i, .
Suretara, pl. = Asura, pl .
Surocanā, a mātṛ. u, .
Suroman, a serpent .
Surottama1 = Brahmán, .
Surottama2 = Indra, .
Surottama3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Surottama4 = Skanda, .
Surottama5 = Vāyu, .
Surottama, dual = the Aśvins, .
Suruc, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Suruci = Viṣṇu .
Surūpa = Śiva, .
Surūpā, name of a cow .
Sūrya1, identified with Savitṛ and Vivasvat, and = Āditya. . . . . . . b Yudhiṣṭhira praised S. saying Thou art the eye of the universe, and the soul of all corporeal existences. Thou art the origin of all creatures, and the embodiment of acts of religious men. Thou art the goal of all the Sāṅkhyas and the final end of the Yogins. Thou art a r not fastened through bolts and the goal of those who desire emancipation. Thou sustainest, discoverest, sanctifiest, and supportest the world. Brahmans versed in the Vedas ae thee with different hymns. Thou art aed by the ṛṣis. Siddhas, Cāraṇas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Guhyakas, and Pannagas follow thy chariot through the sky, the thirty three gods, the hosts of Vaimānikas, with Upendra and Mahendra, the principal Vidyādharas, the Guhyas, the seven divine and human Pitṛgaṇas, the Vasus, the Maruts, the Rudras, the Sādhyas, the Marīcipas, the Vālakhilyas, and other Siddhas, have obtained success by aing thee. Śārṅgadhanvans discus by which he humbles the Asuras, has been forged by Viśvakarman through thy energy. Thou illuminest the whole earth with her dvīpas thou art the beginning and the end of the day of Brahmán, which consists of yugas thou art the lord of the Manus and of their sons, of the manvantaras and of their lords at the time of universal destruction the Saṃvartaka fire is born from thy wrath then clouds, begotten of thy rays, bring about the appointed deluge dividing thyself into twelve suns thou then drinkest up the ocean with thy rays. Thou art Indra, Viṣṇu, Brahmán, Prajāpati, Agni, the subtle mind, etc. he who aes thee on the sixth and seventh lunar day with humility and tranquillity of mind obtains the grace of Lakṣmī bow also to thy followers Māṭhara, Aruṇa, Daṇḍa, etc who whirl thunderbolts, and to the celestial mātṛs Kṣubhā, Maitrī, etc. . . b, . . . . . . f The diameter of Sūrya is, yojanas, his circumference, yojanas, . c, . u, . . . b, . . . c, . b, . b, . . b, . b, . . m, . d, . . Savitṛ, Vivasvat, and the following synonyms Āditya, q.v. Amśumat, . Arka, q.v. . Bhānu, q.v. . Bhānumat, q.v. . Bhāskara, q.v.
Sūryas names . The names are the following Aśvattha, Ādidevo diteḥ sutaḥ, Aindhana, Aja, Alolupa, Aṃśa, Ananta, Aṅgāraka, Āpaḥ, Aravindākṣa, Arihan, Arka, Aryaman, Bhaga, Bhānu, Bhūtādi, Bhūtapati, Bhūtāśraya, Brahmán, Bṛhaspati, Budha, Carācarātman, Śāśvata, Śanaiścara, Śauri, Śaya, Śīghraga, Śuci, Śukra, Dehakartṛ, Dhanvantari, Dharmadhvaja, Dhātṛ, Dhūma ketu, Dīptāṃśu, Dvādaśātman, Dvāpara, Gabhastimat, Indra, Jāṭharo gniḥ, Jaya, Jīmūta, Jīvana, Kalā, Kāla, Kālacakro vibhāvasuḥ, Kālādhyakṣa, Kaliḥ sarvamalāśrayaḥ, Kāmada, Kapila, Karuṇānvita, Kāṣṭhā, Kha, Kṛta, Kṣapā, Kṣaṇa, Maitreya, Manaḥ suparnaḥ, Mokṣadvāraṃ Triviṣṭapa, Mṛtyu, Muhūrtāḥ, Parāyaṇa, Pitā, matā, pitā mahaḥ, Prabhākara, Praśāntātman, Prajā dhyakṣa, Prāṇadhāraṇa, Pṛthivī, Puruṣa, Pūṣan, Ravi, Rudra, Sāgara, Sanātana, Saṃvartako vahniḥ, Saṃvatsarakaro śvatthaḥ, Sarvadhātuniṣecitṛ, Sarvalokana maskṛta, Sarvasyādi, Sarvatomukha, Savitṛ, Skanda, Soma, Sraṣṭṛ, Sūkṣmātman, Sūrya, Svargadvāraṃ prajādvāraṃ, Tamonuda, Tejas, Tejasāṃ patiḥ, Tretā, Tvaṣṭṛ, Vaidyuto gniḥ, Varada, Varuṇa, Vāyu, Vedakartṛ, Vedāṅga, Vedavāhana, Viśāla, Viśvakarman, Viśvātman, Viśvatomukha, Viṣṇu, Vivasvat, Vyaktāvyakta, Yama, Yāma, Yogin, .
Sūrya2, an Asura . Asura.
Sūrya3 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Sūryabhāsa, a Kuru warrior .
Sūryaśrī, a Viśvadeva .
Sūryāda = Rāhu, .
Sūryadatta, a follower of Virāṭa .
Sūryadhvaja, a prince .
Sūryadhvajapatākin = Śiva .
Sūryaja = Karṇa, .
Sūryajā = Bṛhadbhāsā, .
Sūryākṣa, a king .
Sūryaloka . b, . .
Sūryamāla = Śiva .
Sūryanetra, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Sūryaputra1 = Śanaiścara, .
Sūryaputra2 = Karṇa, .
Sūryaputra3 = Manu Vaivasvata, .
Sūryaputra4 = Sugrīva, .
Sūryaputra5, = Yama, .
Sūryaputra, dual = the Aśvins, .
Sūryasambhava = Karṇa, .
Sūryasāvitra, a Viśvadeva .
Sūryatīrtha, a tīrtha .
Sūryavarcas, a Devagandharva .
Sūryavarman, a Trigarta king .
Susaha = Śiva .
Susāman, a brahman .
Susaṅkṣepa = Śiva .
Susaṅkula, a king .
Susaraṇa, Suṣāḍha = Śiva .
Suṣeṇa1, a serpent .
Suṣeṇa2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Suṣeṇa7.
Suṣeṇa3, son of the elder Parikṣit .
Suṣeṇa4, a prince .
Suṣeṇa5, son of Jamadagni .
Suṣeṇa6, a monkey .
Suṣeṇa7, various Kuru warriors .
Suṣeṇa8, son of Karṇa . Karṇaputra, Karṇātmaja.
Suṣeṇa9 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Suṣeṇamātṛ .
Susnāta = Mahāpuruṣa .
Susthala, pl a people .
Susvapna = Śiva .
Susvara, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Sūta1, the ancestor of the Sūtas .
Sūta2, a ṛṣi .
Sūta3, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Sūta4 = Adhiratha, .
Sūta5 = Bandin, .
Sūta6 = Karṇa, .
Sūta7 = Kīcaka, .
Sūta8 = Lohitākṣa, .
Sūta9 = Lomaharṣaṇa, .
Sūta1 = Sañjaya, .
Sūta1 = Ugraśravas, .
Sūta, mostly pl name of a caste, . Do. pl. = Kīcaka, pl .
Sūtaja1 = Karṇa, .
Sūtaja2 = Ugraśravas, .
sūtaja, said of various charioteers, . Do said of the prātikāmin, . Sūta, pl.
Sūtanandana1 = Adhiratha, .
Sūtanandana2 = Karṇa, .
Sūtanandana3 = Sañjaya, .
Sūtanandana4 = Ugraśravas, .
Sutañjaya, a Kuru warrior . Śatruñjaya.
Sutanu, daughter of Āhuka .
Sutantu, Sutapas = Viṣṇu .
Sūtaputra1 = Bandin, .
Sūtaputra2 = Karṇa, .
Sūtaputra3 = Kīcaka, .
Sūtaputra4 = Sañjaya, .
Sūtaputra5 = Ugraśravas, .
Sūtaputra6, said of various charioteers, . Do. = the prātikāmin, .
Sūtaputra, pl. = Kīcaka pl . Do. = the brothers of Karṇa, .
Sutasoma, son of Bhīmasena and Draupadī . Draupadeya, sg. and pl.
Sutasomamātṛ = Draupadī, .
Sūtasūnu1 = Karṇa, . Do. = Sañjaya, .
Sūtasuta = Karṇa, .
Sūtatanaya = Karṇa, .
Sūtātmaja = Karṇa, .
Sutejana, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Sutejas = Sucetas. b, .
Sūti, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Sutīkṣṇadaśana = Śiva .
Sutīrtha = Śiva, .
Sutīrthaka, a tīrtha .
Sutuṅga, a mountain .
Suvāc1, v. Sadaḥsuvāc.
Suvāc2, a brahman .
Suvāha, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Suvāhu, v. Subāhu.
Suvaktra1, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Suvaktra2 = Śiva, .
Suvāmā, a river .
Suvapus = Śiva, .
Suvarcalā, the wife of Sūrya . b, .
Suvarcas1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
Suvarcas2, a prince .
Suvarcas3, a brahman .
Suvarcas4, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Suvarcas5, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Suvarcas6, a Kuru warrior .
Suvarcas7, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Suvarcas8 = Karandhama, son of Khanīnetra. d . Seeing the reverses sustained by his father S. devoted all his energy to increase the welfare of the people. He was pious, and his subjects were well pleased with him but as he was constantly engaged in virtuous deeds, his treasures and vehicles became greatly reduced, and the feudatory princes troubled him, so that he came in great distress, but they could not slay him, for his power was established in righteousness at last he blew into his hand, and from that there appeared a supply of forces then he vanquished all his foes and was called Karandhama. His son Avikṣit lived in the beginning of the Tretāyuga, . Karandhame.
Suvarcas9 = Śiva, .
Suvarcasa, Suvarcasin = Śiva .
Suvarman1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Suvarman2, a Kuru warrior .
Suvarṇa1, a Devagandharva . Suparṇa2.
Suvarṇa2, a ṛṣi .
Suvarṇa3 = Śiva .
Suvarṇā, daughter of Ikṣvāku . Aikṣvākī.
Suvarṇābha, son of Śaṅkhapada. b, diśāṃ pālaṃ
Suvarṇabindu = Viṣṇu .
Suvarṇacūḍa, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Suvarṇaśiras, a ṛṣi.
Suvarṇadhārin = Kapila, .
Suvarṇākhya1, a tīrtha . Do name of a locality .
Suvarṇakoṣaprāpti .
Suvarṇākṣa = Śiva, .
Suvarṇamukuṭa = Śiva, .
Suvarṇanāma, Suvarṇapriya = Śiva .
Suvarṇaretas = Śiva .
Suvarṇaṣṭhīvin, son of Sṛñjaya . b, . Kāñcanaṣṭhīvin, Svarṇaṣṭhīvin.
. b Parvata, after having taken counsel with Nārada, granted a boon to Sṛñjaya in the form of a son, but Indra would not let him be long lived, and Parvata would not destine otherwise from partiality to Indra, but Nārada told Sṛñjaya to think of him. Nārada and Parvata left Sṛñjayas presence. Indra slew Suvarṇaṣṭhīvin, causing his vajra to assume the form of a tiger, on the shores of the Bhāgīrathī. Sṛñjaya, in his distress, thought of Nārada, who recited to him the Ṣoḍaśarājop and brought the child back to life, with Indras permission Suvarṇaṣṭhīvin ruled for years, gratifying . and P and procreated many sons ere he died .
Suvarṇavarman, a Kāśi king .
Suvarṇavarṇa = Viṣṇu .
. b . Vasiṣṭha told to Rāma Jāmadagnya After the wedding of Rudra and Devī on Himavat, all the gods, fearing that Rudras offspring would consume the worlds, prevailed upon him to withdraw his vital seed Umā cursed the gods, saying that they should become sonless but Agni was not present. A small quantity of Rudras seed, however, leaped into fire and began to develop mean while, the gods, with Indra, were scorched by As. Tāraka Ā R M A and Sā. all became afflicted all the regions of the deities, etc and the retreats of Ṛ. were snatched away by As. . and Ṛ. repaired to Brahmán, who had granted Tāraka the boon that he should not be killed by As or Rā and Umā had cursed . Brahmán said that Agni was not there therefore his offspring, transcending Dā Rā even G N and birds, will with his dart destroy Tāraka Kāma is eternal, and in order to slay the enemies of the gods Agni will throw Rudras seed into the Gaṅgā. The gods failed to find out Agni a frog, having been scorched by the energy of Agni, appeared on the surface of the water, and said to the gods that Agni was now under the water Agni, leaving the spot, cursed the frogs, saying that they should be without taste the gods granted them boons . An elephant revealed to the gods that Agni was now residing within a certain aśvattha tree Agni, entering the heart of the śamī tree, cursed all the elephants, saying that their tongues should be bent back the gods granted that they should be able to eat everything and utter indistinct cries. Agni was then revealed by a parrot, and cursed the parrots, saying that they should be deprived of the power of speech the gods granted them to speak the letter k, and made śamī wood a sacred resting place of fire. The waters in the nethermost regions had come into contact with Agni, and those heated waters are vomited forth by the mountain springs. The gods asked Agni to rescue Prajāpatis, and Ṛ. from Tāraka by begetting a heroic son. Agni united himself spiritually with Gaṅgā an Asura uttered a frightful roar Gaṅgā became agitated and unable to bear the seed, and threw it off on Meru the fœtus had the complexion of gold, etc. therefore Ṛ. and . called Agni by the name of Hiraṇyaretas, and the earth Vasumatī . That fœtus, having fallen in a thicket of reeds, assumed a wonderful form the Kṛttikāḥ reared it as their son, whence it came to be called Kārttikeya he was also called Skanda and Guha . It was in this way that gold came into existence as the offspring of Agni, and hence gold was called jātarūpa gold is truly the illustrious Agni, the lord of all things, and the foremost of all Prajāpatis the most sacred of all sacred things is gold it has for its essence Agni and Soma. Vasiṣṭha continued This tale was also heard by me in days of yore about Brahmán Paramātman In days of yore, Rudra, who is Brahmán, etc having assumed the form of Varuṇa, performed a sacrifice, to which came the munis and all the deities with Agni, etc. . Śiva then himself poured libations into his own self. At the sight of the celestial damsels the seed of Brahmán fell upon the Earth Pūṣan took it up, and it was taken with the sacrificial ladle and poured as an oblation into the fire thence Brahmán caused the orders of beings to spring into existence further Bhṛgu, etc. for this reason Agni is said to be all the deities. Bhṛgu was reckoned the offspring of Varuṇa, Aṅgiras that of Agni, Kavi that of Brahmán Bhṛgu, Aṅgiras, and Kavi were all of them prajānāṃ patayaḥ their offspring are called Vāruṇāḥ, and Kavi and Bhṛgu Vāruṇau. Agni is Brahmán, Paśupati, etc. gold is the offspring of Agni when fire is not obtainable gold is used as a substitute, oh Jāmadagnya by one who is conversant with the vedic authorities, etc. Agni sprang from Brahmán, and from Agni sprang gold those persons observant of righteousness who make gifts of gold are regarded as giving away all the deities, etc. he who makes a gift of gold at the second twilight succeeds in attaining to residence with Brahmán, Vāyu, Agni, and Soma, and to the regions of Indra, etc. he has never to fall n from the regions to which he attains . After a long time Kārttikeya grew up, and was chosen as generalissimo by all the gods with Indra he slew Dai. Tāraka and many other Asuras. Bhīṣma continued Thus addressed by Vasiṣṭha Jāma dagnya made gifts of gold to the brahmans and became cleansed of his sins .
Suvāsa = Śiva .
Suvāsas = Śiva, .
Suvāstu, a river .
Suvāstuka, a prince .
Suveśa, a god .
Suveṇā, a river .
Suviśālā, a mātṛ. u, .
Suvijñeya = Śiva .
Suvīra, pl a people . Sauvīra pl.
Suvīra1, a prince .
Suvīra2 = Jayadratha, . Suvīra, etc.
Suvīra3, a prince. b, .
Suvīra4 = Skanda, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Suvīrarāṣṭrapa1 = Jayadratha, . Do. = Śatruñjaya7
Suvrata1, name of two warriors of Skanda. u, .
Suvrata2 = Skanda, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Suyaśā, a princess .
Suyajñā, a princess, daughter of Prasenajit .
Suyajus, son of Bhumanyu .
Suyāma, pl a class of gods .
Suyāmuna = Viṣṇu .
Suyodhana = Duryodhana, q.v.
Suyukta = Śiva .
Svābhāvya = Viṣṇu .
svadhā, the food offered to the pitṛs, . Different deities identified with the s. Śiva, Śrī, Durgā, Kṛṣṇa, Skanda, . Do a ritual exclamation, .
Svadhāsvarūpa = Śiva, .
Svadhāvat pl a class of pitṛs .
Svadhṛta = Viṣṇu .
Svādukāra, name of a caste, .
Svāhā, personified as a daughter of Dakṣa, wife of Agni . u, . b, . Different deities identified with the s. Śiva, Śrī, Kṛṣṇa, Sarasvatī, Skanda, .
Svāhākāra1, the exclamation svāhā, . Do. = Durgā, .
Svāheya = Skanda, .
Svakṣa, pl a people .
Svakṣa = Viṣṇu .
Svana, name of a fire .
Svaṅga, Svānga, Svāpana = Viṣṇu .
Svar1, mostly occurring in compounds, e.g. gamana, gata, gati, netṛ, nivāsa, yāta . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Svarāj = Kṛṣṇa, .
Svarāṣṭra, a people .
Svaravyañjanabhūṣaṇa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Svarbhānavī, wife of Āyus .
Svarbhānu, an Āsura, commonly the demon who causes eclipses . d, . b, . b, . m, . Asura, Rāhu. Do. = Śiva .
Svarbhānuśatru = Sūrya, .
Svarbhānusūdana = Sūrya, .
Svarga, etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc passim.
Svargadvāra1, name of a tīrtha .
Svargadvāra2 = Śiva .
Svargadvāraṃ prajādvāraṃ = Sūrya, .
Svargadvāraspṛśa = Agni, q.v.
Svargaloka = Svarga, etc etc etc .
Svargamārga, a tīrtha. z, .
Svargaparvan = Svargā rohaṇaparvan . c, .

Svargārohaṇika .
Svargārohaṇika parva, the nd of the minor parvans of Mhbhr . . Vaiśampāyana said When Yudhiṣṭhira had taken leave of the citizens, etc he comforted the wis, whose husbands had been slain, with abundant gifts, and being duly installed on the throne, he reassured all his subjects, etc. After fifty days, seeing that the sun had begun its northern course, he set out to see Bhīṣma, taking with him what was necessary for the latters cremation, accompanied by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Gāndhārī, Kuntī, his brothers, Kṛṣṇa, Vidura, Yuyutsu, Yuyudhāna, and his other relatives and a great retinue, and his priests. He beheld Bhīṣma surrounded by Ṛ Vyāsa, Nārada, Asita Devala, and by the remnant of unslain kings from various parts of the country, guarded by the warriors appointed for that duty all the inhabitants of Kurujāṅgala were also there. When Yudhiṣṭhira had told his errand, Bhīṣma opened his eyes and saw all the Bharatas assembled. He seized the hand of Yudhiṣṭhira and welcomed him he had now been lying there for fifty eight nights, which he had felt to be as long as a century now it was the bright fort night of Māgha, and of this one fourth had passed away. Then he reminded Dhṛtarāṣṭra of the instructions he had received from Vyāsa, and that he should regard the Pāṇḍavas and especially Yudhiṣṭhira as his own sons. Then he praised Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme God, and asked him to grant him leave to die, and that he should ever protect the Pāṇḍavas he complained that Duryodhana had never been willing to follow his counsels he said that he knew from Nārada and Vyāsa, that Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna were Ṛ Nārāyaṇa and Nara, who had lived for a long time in Badarī. Kṛṣṇa then gave Bhīṣma leave to die and come to the Vasus, comparing him to Mārkaṇḍeya. Having given some few admonitions to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc Bhīṣma successively caused his life breaths to leave his body, and the parts of his body became successively free from wounds and arrows, at which the bystanders became filled with wonder. His soul passed through the crown of his head, ascended to heaven like a meteor, and soon became invisible, while the celestial kettle drums began to play, a rain of flowers fell n, and Si. and B ṛ. applauded. Then the Pāṇḍavas, etc. cremated the corpse. Then, accompanied by Ṛ etc they pro ceeded to Bhāgīrathī, where they offered oblations of water to Bhīṣma. Then Bhāgīrathī appeared and, weeping, praised Bhīṣma . Kṛṣṇa comforted her, mentioning the present felicity of Bhīṣma as one of the Vasus, and declared that he had not been slain by Śikhaṇḍin, but by Arjuna. Gaṅgā gave up her grief all the kings, headed by Kṛṣṇa, obtained her permission to depart, and all returned .
=, q.v.
Svargatīrtha, name of a tīrtha. n, .
Svarloka, .
Svarṇagrīva, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Svarṇakeśa = Śiva, .
Svarṇaṣṭhīvin = Suvarṇaṣṭhīvin, .
Svarṇabindu, a tīrtha. c, .
Svārociṣa = Manu5, .
Svarūpa, an Asura .
Svaryāti, .
Svasti = Viṣṇu .
Svastibhāva = Śiva .
Svastibhuj = Viṣṇu .
Svastida1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Svastidakṣiṇa = Viṣṇu .
Svastika1, a serpent .
Svastika2, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Svastikṛt = Viṣṇu .
Svastimatī, a mātṛ. u, .
Svastipura, a tīrtha .
Svastyātreya, a ṛṣi .
Svāsya = Viṣṇu .
Svāti, name of a nakṣatra .
Svavaśa = Viṣṇu .
Svayambhū or Svayambhu = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Svayambhubhavana . n Gautama said where there is no fear of cold or heat, no hunger, thirst, pain, sorrow, joy, no one that is agreeable or disagreeable, no friend and no enemy, no decrepitude and death, neither righteousness nor sin which is free from passion, happy, and where there is wis and sattva...Dhṛtarāṣṭra said They who are freed from every attachment, possessed of purified souls, steady in their vow, devoted to yoga, who have attained to the happiness of heaven, and consist of sattva, attain to the sacred abode of Brahmán, .
Svayambhūta = Śiva .
Svayambhuva1 = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Svāyambhuva1 = Manu6, .
Svāyambhuva2 = Atri, .
Svāyambhuva, adj. relating to Svayambhū dharmeṣukratuḥsthānaṃmahāsthānaṃvimānaṃ
Svayambhuvo vana. c In the S. v. Viśvakarman on the occasion of a sacrifice had given the earth to Kaśyapa as dakṣiṇā. Angry because she had been given to a mortal the earth sank to Rasātala, but appeased by Kaśyapa rose again from within the water in the form of an altar . As soon as this altar is touched by a mortal it enters the sea
Svayaṃśreṣṭha = Śiva .
Svayamprabhā, an Apsaras.
Svayaṃvara .
. . . The Pāṇḍavas went to the Pāñcāla land in the company of brahmans, who told them of the svayaṃvara, and of Dhṛṣṭa dyumna, and Kṛṣṇā . On their way they beheld Dvaipāyana. They took up their quarters in the house of a potter, and ating the brahmanical profession, they began to lead a mendicant life. Yajñasena always cherished the wish of bestowing his daughter on Kirīṭin, but never spoke of this wish to anybody. He therefore caused a very stiff bow to be made, which was incapable of being bent by anybody except Arjuna and causing some machinery to be erected in the sky, he set up a mark attached to that machinery, and said He who with this bow and these arrows hits the mark shall obtain my daughter. Among the kings that came were Duryodhana and the Kurus and Karṇa. The princes entered the arena by the north eastern gate . The arena was situated to the north east of the capital . On the day Draupadī, having bathed, entered the arena. Then the purohita of the Somakas gratified Agni. Dhṛṣṭadyumna, possessing a voice deep as that of a kettle drum or of the clouds, taking hold of his sisters arm, stood in the midst of the arena, and said Hit the mark by means of these five arrows. Then he addressed his sister, reciting to her the names, etc. of the assembled princes . . Enumeration of the assembled princes . . There came also the devagaṇas on their chariots the Rudras and the Ādityas, the Vasus and the Aśvins, the Sādhyas and all the Maruts, with Yama and Dhaneśvara walking ahead and also the Daityas and Suparṇas, the mahoragas, the Devarṣis, the Guhyakas and the Cāraṇas, Viśvāvasu, Nārada and Parvata, the principal Gandharvas with the Apsarases, and the Asuras and Siddhas, and Halāyudha, and Janārdana, and the chiefs of the Vṛṣṇis, Andhakas, and Yadus, always obedient to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa pointed out the Pāṇḍavas to his brother Rāma. When Duryodhana, the Cedi king Śiśupāla, Jarāsandha, the Madra king Śalya, etc. had in vain tried to string the bow, and Karṇa, though having succeeded in stringing it, had, as a sūta, been rejected by Kṛṣṇā, Jiṣṇu came forward . Some of the brahmans spoke reproachingly of Arjunas daring undertaking, some approved of it . Arjuna, bending his head to Īśāna and remembering Kṛṣṇa, accom plished the task. The gods showered celestial flowers. Drupada was filled with joy. Yudhiṣṭhira with the twins returned home. Kṛṣṇā approached Arjuna, who soon after wards left the lists followed by her . . When Drupada expressed his desire of bestowing his daughter on that brahman, the kings resolved to slay Drupada and burn Kṛṣṇā, but spare Arjuna, whom they took for a brahman. They rushed at Drupada, who was defended by Arjuna with the bow and by Bhīma with a tree torn up by the root. Kṛṣṇa then knew, and said to Balarāma that they must be the Pāṇḍavas, who had escaped from the fire . Karṇa was defeated by Arjuna, and the Madra king Śalya by Bhīma then Duryodhana, etc who had been engaged with the brahmans, desisted from the combat, because brahmans, though offending, should yet always be protected. Kṛṣṇa said to them that those brahmans had justly acquired the maiden. The kings returned to their respective kings. Bhīma and Arjuna, with difficulty, escaped from the throng, followed by Kṛṣṇā. . Kuntī was filled with anxiety, seeing that her sons were late in returning from their begging tour. Then, in the late afternoon, Jiṣṇu, accompanied by a body of brahmans, entered the abode of the Bhārgava . Bhīma and Arjuna presented Kṛṣṇā as their alms, and Kuntī, not yet seeing them, said enjoy ye all. Afterwards, she was alarmed at what she had said. Yudhiṣṭhira declared that Arjuna should wed her but Arjuna replied that it was a sin for the younger brother to marry before the elder. Meanwhile, they all fell in love with Kṛṣṇā. Then Yudhiṣṭhira recollected the words of Vyāsa, and, from fear of a division amongst the brothers, said that she should be the common wife of them all. Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma then paid them a visit, and again went away . When Bhīma and Arjuna were turning towards the abode of the Bhārgava, Dhṛṣṭa dyumna followed them and concealed himself in some part of the house. Then Bhīma and Arjuna and the twins returning from their begging tour in the evening, gave everything to Yudhiṣṭhira. Kuntī caused Kṛṣṇā to distribute it, giving to Bhīma alone as much as to all the others, because he always ate much. Then they laid n for the night, and Dhṛṣṭa dyumna overheard their conversations. In the morning Dhṛṣṭadyumna set out to report it to Drupada, who was sad, because he did not know, if perhaps a man of mean descent had taken away his daughter, though he thought it possible that it was Arjuna .
Svayañjāta = Viṣṇu .
Svedajāh = Śiva .
Sviṣṭakṛt, a fire .
Sviṣṭakṛt2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Syamantaka, a jewel .
Syamantapañcaka, v. Su.
Syūmaraśmi, a ṛṣi .
Tad = Viṣṇu .
Tāḍakāyana, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Taḍitprabhā, a mātṛ. u, .
Taijasa, name of a tīrtha .
Takṣaśilā, name of a city . b, .
Takṣaka, name of a serpent king . d, . Nāga, Nāgarāja, Nāgendra, Pannaga, Pannageśvara, Pannagendra.
Takṣakaputra = Aśvasena, .
Tala, Tāla = Śiva .
tāla, . Tāladhvaja, Tālaketu.
Tālacara, pl a people . Tālajaṅgha pl.
Tāladhvaja1 = Bhīṣma, q.v. Do. = Balarāma, .
Tālajaṅgha . b, . g, .
Tālajaṅgha, pl a people .
Tālākaṭa, name of a city .
Tālaketu1, a prince. b, .
Tālaketu2 = Balarāma, . Do. = Bhīṣma, .
Tālavana, pl a people .
Tālin = Śiva .
Tamas1, a brahman. b, .
Tamas2 = Śiva .
Tamasā, a river .
Tamasī, a river .
Tamoghna = Sūrya, .
Tamontakṛt, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Tamonuda = Sūrya, .
Tāmrā, wife of Kaśyapa .
Tāmrā, a river .
Tāmracūḍa, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Tāmracūḍā, a mātṛ. u, .
Tāmrāhvaya, name of a dvīpa .
Tāmralipta .
Tāmralipta, pl a people . next.
Tāmraliptaka, pl a people .
Tāmraparṇī, a tīrtha . Do a mountain .
Tāmrāruṇa, a tīrtha . next.
Tāmrāruṇā, a river . the prec.
Tāmrauṣṭha, a Yakṣa .
Tāmravatī, a river .
Tāmroṣṭha = Śiva .
Taṃsu, an ancient king .
Tanabāla, pl a people .
Tanaya, pl a people .
Taṇḍi, a ṛṣi . Brahmayoni.
Taṇḍūlikāśrama, a tīrtha .
Tāṇḍya, one or more ṛṣis . c, .
Taṅgana, pl a people .
Tantipāla, the name which Sahadeva assumed in the palace of Virāṭa .
Tantripāla v. Tantipāla.
Tantuvardhana = Viṣṇu .
Tanu, a ṛṣi . Devarṣi.
Tanuvāsas = Śiva, .
Tapaḥsakta = Śiva .
Tapaḥsuta = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Tapana1 = Sūrya, .
Tapana2, a Nāga .
Tapana3, a Pāñcāla warrior .
Tapana4 = Śiva .
Tapa, name of several fires .
Tapas1 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Tāpasāraṇya, a tīrtha .
Tapasvin = Śiva .
Tapatāṃ gati = Śiva, .
Tapatī, daughter of Sūrya and wife of Saṃvaraṇa . Saurī, Sāvitryavarajā, Vaivasvatī.
Tāpatya, pl. .
Tāpatya, sg. = Arjuna, .
Tāpatya, adj. .
Tāpatyavardhana = Arjuna, .
. . Arjuna asked why he had called him Tāpatya, and Citraratha said Sūrya had a lovely daughter Tapatī, the younger sister of Sāvitrī. Ṛkṣas son, the king Saṃvaraṇa, duly worshipped Sūrya to him Sūrya resolved to bestow his daughter. Once, when Saṃvaraṇa went on a hunting expedition, his steed died from fatigue on the mountain, and he began to wander on foot and saw Tapatī alone, and declared her his love. She did not speak a word, but disappeared. He wandered through the whole forest in search of her, and failing to find her, indulged in lamentations . He fell n on the earth. Then she appeared again. He asked her to marry him according to the Gāndharva form of marriage. She said that she loved him, but told him to ask her father Āditya for her hand, with worship, ascetic penances, and vows . Tapatī then ascended to the skies, and Saṃvaraṇa again fell n on the earth. At last his followers found him, and his minister raised him up and sprinkled his head with water, etc. Regaining his consciousness, Saṃvaraṇa sent away all his attendants with the exception of his minister alone, and then began to worship Sūrya. He also thought of his purohita, the ṛṣi Vasiṣṭha. After the king had stayed thus on the same spot day and night, the Viprarṣi Vasiṣṭha came there on the day. Vasiṣṭha knew at once, by his ascetic power, what had happened and ascended to the sky in order to see Sūrya, and asked him to give Tapatī to Saṃvaraṇa. Saṃvaraṇa, with due rites, took Tapatīs hand on that mountain resorted to by the gods and the Gandharvas. And the king caused Vasiṣṭha to be proclaimed his regent in his capital and king, etc and sported with his wife in the woods on that mountain for twelve years. Now Indra for twelve years poured no rain in his capital and king. Then Vasiṣṭha brought Saṃvaraṇa and his wife back into the city, and then Indra poured rain in abundance. Saṃvaraṇa, with Tapatī, performed sacrifices for twelve years. Their son was Kuru, the ancestor of Arjuna .
Tapiṣṇu = Sūrya, .
Tapodāna, a tīrtha .
Tapomaya, Taponidhi = Śiva .
Taponiṣṭha = Śiva
Taponitya = Śiva .
Taporata = Śiva, .
Taptatapas = Śiva, .
Tapya, Tara = Śiva .
Tāra1, name of a monkey .
Tāra2 = Viṣṇu .
Tārā, wife of the monkey Vālin .
Tārā, wife of Bṛhaspati .
Tārādhipa = Soma, .
Tāraka1, an Asura . u, . b, . b, . Asura, Daiteya, Daitya, Daityasattama, Daityendra, Dānava.
Tāraka2 = Śiva .
Tāraka, pl the sons of Tāraka1 .
Tārakākṣa, an Asura. d, . Tārākṣa.
Tārakākṣasuta = Hari5, .
Tārākṣa = Tārakākṣa, .
Tārakāmaya1, adj. . b, .
Tārakāmaya2 = Śiva .
Tārakārāja = Soma, .
Tārakavadhopākhyāna . b . and Ṛ reduced to great distress, urged the six Kṛttikāḥ to rear that child . Amongst the celestial ladies there were none, save these, that could bear the seed of Agni in their wombs. Agni became gratified. His energy was divided into six portions, and a portion was placed in each of the Kṛttikās. All of them were delivered at the same time, and the six portions united into one. The Earth received the child from a heap of gold. He grew up in a celestial forest of reeds, reared by the Kṛttikās . The thirty three gods, etc. came to see him Ṛ. praised him, G. sang in honour of Kumāra, with six faces, etc. . The gods gave him various kinds of toys, etc. . Rā. and As. began to walk in the train of Skanda. Tāraka in vain sought, by various means, to slay him. The gods made him the commander of their forces, and when he had grown up he slew Tāraka with his irresistible dart as in sport, and re established Indra in the sovereignty. Skanda became the protector of the gods and did what was agreeable to Śaṅkara . Gold is the powerful energy of Agni and was born with Kārttikeya hence gold is highly auspicious. Thus did Vasiṣṭha relate to Rāma in days of old. By making gifts of gold Rāma became purified of all his sins, and attained to a high place in heaven that is not easily attainable by men .
Tarala, pl a people .
tārāmṛga . Mṛgaśiras.
Tāraṇa1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Taraṇḍaka, v. Arantuka.
Taraṅgāṅkitakeśa = Śiva .
Taraṅgavid = Śiva .
Tarantuka, name of a dvārapāla and a tīrtha belonging to him . kk, .
Tārāpati = Soma, .
Tāriṇī = Durgā, .
tarkaśāstra, .
Tārkṣya1, one or more ṛṣis, especially = Ariṣṭanemi .
Tārkṣya2 = Garuḍa, .
Tārkṣya3 = Śiva .
Tārkṣya, pl a people .
Tārkṣyakapidhvaja, dual, .
Tārkṣyaketana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Tārkṣyalakṣaṇa, .
Taru1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Taruṇa, name of a Gandharva .
Taruṇaka, a serpent .
Tasthuṣāṃ patiḥ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Taṭa, Taṭānāṃ pati = Śiva .
Tatpada = Kṛṣṇa, .
Tattva, Tattvavid = Viṣṇu .
Taṭya = Śiva .
Tejas1 .
Tejas2 = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Tejasāṃ patiḥ = Sūrya, .
Tejaskaro nidhi = Śiva .
Tejasvin1, name of one of the five Indras .
Tejasvin2 = Śiva .
Tejeyu, son of Raudrāśva .
Tejopahārin = Śiva .
tena, pl v. stena, pl.
Tigmamanyu = Śiva .
Tigmāṃśu1 = Sūrya, . Do. = Agni .
Tigmatejas = Śiva .
Tīkṣṇa, Tīkṣṇadaṃṣṭra = Śiva, .
Tīkṣṇatāpa = Śiva .
Tilabhāra, pl a people .
Tilottamā, name of an Apsaras . b Brahmán caused Viśvakarman to make a celestial maiden from small portions of every kind of gem, whence she was called Tilottmā . Brahmán was sitting with his face turned eastwards and the ṛṣis facing all directions. As T. was walking round them, there appeared three other faces on the body of Mahādeva and eyes on Indra, while all the other celestials, only excepting Pitāmaha, and the ṛṣis gazed at her, . b, .
Timiṅgila, a king .
Tīragraha, pl a people .
tīrtha, pl. . u, .
Tīrthadeva = Śiva .
Tīrthakara = Viṣṇu .
Tīrthamahāhrada, name of a tīrtha .
Tīrthasenī, a mātṛ. u, .
Tīrthayātrā .
. Draupadī, Bhīmasena, Nakula, and Sahadeva lamented Arjuna Sahadeva suggested to move from the Kāmyaka wood . Then came the devarṣi Nārada who, at the request of Yudhiṣṭhira, told them what the brahmarṣi Pulastya had formerly said to Bhīṣma about the merits of circumambulating the earth for the purpose of visiting the tīrthas, when Bhīṣma was engaged in a pitrya vrata at Gaṅgādvāra in the company of munis, and made oblations to the pitṛs, gods, and ṛṣis . At Bhīṣmas request Pulastya explained the qualities of a person who will acquire merit by visiting tīrthas he said that the costly sacrifices, which only kings and very rich men are capable of affording, are not of greater merit than a sojourn in tīrthas, which even the poorest may accom plish. Then he first described Puṣkara . Then he enumerated a great many of tīrthas and the merit of visiting them. Vaḍavā . Pulastyas enumeration of tīrthas continued . Kurukṣetra . The enumeration con tinued. Rāmahradāḥ . The enumera tion continued. Maṅkaṇaka . The enumeration continued. Prthūdaka . The enumeration continued. Kurukṣetra . The enumeration continued . Tuṅgaka . The enumeration continued. Prayāga . The enumeration continued. Gaṅgā is equal to Kurukṣetra, wherever one may bathe in it, especially in Kanakhala and in Prayāga, which is the most excellent a bath in the Gaṅgā in that place removes sins. In the Kṛtayuga all the tīrthas were sacred, in the Tretāyuga Puṣkara alone, in the Dvāpara Kurukṣetra, in the Kaliyuga Gaṅgā. In Puṣkara one should practise austerities, in Mahālaya one should make gifts, on the Malaya one should ascend the funeral pyre, in Bhṛgutuṅga one should kill oneself by fasting bathing in Puṣkara, Kurukṣetra, the Gaṅgā, and Magadha one purifies seven generations of ones race upwards and nwards, etc. as long as ones bones lie in contact with the water of the Gaṅgā, so long s one live, honoured in heaven . Pitāmaha has said that no tīrtha is equal to the Gaṅgā, no God to Keśava, and none is superior to brahmans. This truthful description one should recite only to the twice born, etc. . In these tīrthas have bathed the Vasus, the Sādhyas, the Ādityas, the Maruts, the Aśvins, and the Ṛṣis, who are equal to the gods. Only men of piety and learning are able to visit these tīrthas on account of their purified senses, their belief in god, and their acquaintance with the Vedas . Nārada continued Then Pulastya disappeared, and Bhīṣma, at the command of Pulastya, wandered over the earth and ended his tīrthayātrā at Prayāga. The man that so walks about the earth is rewarded after death as much as for horse sacrifices. So wilt thou Yudhiṣṭhira obtain the eight fold dharma, as Bhīṣma did before, and because thou wilt lead the ṛṣis, thy merit will be eight fold those tīrthas are infested by Rākṣasas, and no king, save thyself, has gone there . The foremost of ṛṣis are always there and expect thee Vālmīki, Kaśyapa, Ātreya, Kuṇḍajaṭhara, Viśvāmitra, Gautama, Asita Devala, Mārkaṇḍeya, Gālava, Bharadvāja, Vasiṣṭha, Uddālaka, Śaunaka with his son, Vyāsa, Durvāsas, and Jābāli. With them thou visit these tīrthas. The great ṛṣi Lomaśa will come to thee, thou follow him and me to these tīrthas. Then Nārada disappeared and Yudhiṣṭhira spoke to the ascetics of the tīrthas . Dhaumya tīrthaka thana . While Dhaumya was speaking thus, Lomaśa arrived and told that Arjuna had obtained Brahma śiras, learnt the Gāndharva Veda, etc. . Lomaśa said that Arjuna had asked him to cause Yudhiṣṭhira to visit all tīrthas, like Manu and other rājarṣis, and protect him from the Rākṣasas as Dadhīca had protected Indra and Aṅgiras had protected the Sun. Lomaśa had twice before visited the tīrthas. At the command of Lomaśa, Yudhiṣṭhira caused the citizens, brahmans, and Yatis, who were not able to endure the privations of the journey, to return to Hāsti napura, where Dhṛtarāṣṭra gave them their proper allow ances from affection for Yudhiṣṭhira, and Yudhiṣṭhira, with only a small number of brahmans abode for three nights at Kāmyaka cheered by Lomaśa . The brahmans, who dwelt in the wood, prevailed upon Yudhiṣṭhira that he allowed them to partake of the tīrthayātrā. Just when they were about to start, Vyāsa, Parvata, and Nārada came to Kāmyaka, and caused them not only to fulfil human vows by purifying the body, but even divine vows by purifying the heart, that it might be free from evil thoughts and harbour only friendly feelings towards everybody. When those celestial and human ṛṣis had performed the usual propitiatory ceremonies, and when they had worshipped the feet of Lomaśa, Dvaipāyana, Nārada, and the devarṣi Parvata, the Pāṇḍavas and Kṛṣṇā started towards the east with Dhaumya and the ascetics on the day following Mārgaśīrṣī, when Puṣya was in ascendance, dressed in bark and hides, with matted locks, cased in mail, and armed with swords, etc with Indrasena and other attendants with some fourteen chariots and a number of cooks . As Yudhi ṣṭhira asked why he who is virtuous is unhappy, and his enemies who are sinful, happy, Lomaśa said that sinful men often prosper in consequence of their sins, but at last they are overtaken by destruction, even as in the devayuga the Daiteyas and Dānavas, who practised vice and did not visit the tīrthas, for a time prospered by their sin and vanquished the gods, who practised virtue and visited the tīrthas at last, when the good qualities, prosperity, etc left the Asuras and went to the gods, while bad qualities, adversity, etc came to the Asuras, and Kali possessed them, they were overtaken by destruction. Nṛga, Śibi Auśīnara, Bhagīratha, Vasumanas, Gaya, Pūru, and Purūravas had by practising ascetic penances and visiting tīrthas, etc obtained fame and wealth, etc and so would Yudhiṣṭhira, and as Ikṣvāku with his sons, etc and Mucukunda, Māndhātṛ, and Marutta, and the gods and devarṣis obtained fame by the power of asceticism, so would Yudhiṣṭhira, while the Dhārtarāṣṭras, enslaved by sinfulness and ignorance, soon would be exterminated . The Pāṇḍavas with their followers, proceeding from place to place, at last arrived at Naimiṣa, and thence to the Gomatī, etc. . Brahmasaras . Gaya . Thence they came to the hermitage of Agastya, and dwelt in Durjayā there asked by Yudhiṣṭhira Lomaśa told Agastyopākhyāna . Descrip tion of the Gaṅgā . Then, having at the suggestion of Lomaśa, with his brothers and Kṛṣṇā, bathed in Bhṛgos tīrthaṃ and gratified the gods and Pitṛs, Yudhiṣṭhira blazed forth in brighter effulgence and became invincible. At his request Lomaśa told Jāmadagnyatejohānikathana . Yudhiṣṭhira wished to hear the details of Agastya. Lomaśa related Agastyopākhyāna . At the request of Yudhiṣṭhira Lomaśa related how Agastya had caused Vindhya to cease to increase, how Agastya drank up the Ocean, Sagara, Asamañjas, Gaṅgāvataraṇa . Then Yudhiṣṭhira pro ceeded to the rivers Nandā and Aparanandā and the Hemakūṭa mountain. Having, at the command of Lomaśa, bathed in Nandā, they proceeded to the river Kauśikī with the hermitages of Viśvāmitra and of Kāśyapa, the father of Ṛṣyaśṛṅga . At the request of Yudhi ṣṭhira Lomaśa told the history of Ṛṣyaśṛṅga Starting from Kauśikī, Yudhiṣṭhira in succession repaired to all the sacred shrines and came to the sea where the Gaṅgā falls into it, and bathed in the centre of rivers. Then they proceeded by the shore of the sea towards the Kaliṅga country. Lomaśa said Here is the river Vaitaraṇī . When they had all bathed in the Vaitaraṇī, Yudhiṣṭhira felt as if he were carried off from the region of men, and beheld all worlds, and heard the reciting of Vaikhānasas, whom Lomaśa declared to be at the distance of, yojanas. Lomaśa ordered him to be silent, as this was the divine forest of Svayambhū taught by Lomaśa the words to be recited Yudhiṣṭhira mounted the altar of Kaśyapa and bathed in the sea then he went to the Mahendra mountain and spent the night there . Lomaśa told Yudhiṣṭhira the names of the ascetics, and he, with his brothers, paid a visit to them. Akṛtavraṇa, a follower of Rāma Jāmadagnya, told him when Paraśu Rāma appeared, and that the following day was the th. At the request of Yudhiṣṭhira, Akṛtavraṇa related the story of Arjuna Kārtavīrya, and Jamadagni, and Paraśurāma Mahendrācala gamana . On their journey to the tīrthas they bathed in a holy stream, and thence reached to Godāvarī and to the sea then to Agastyatīrtha and the Nārī tīrthas, where they heard of and praised the deed of Arjuna, and gave away thousands of cows, and by and by they reached Śūrpāraka, where they saw the altar of Ṛcīkas son surrounded by crowds of ascetics, and the shrines of the Vasus, of the hosts of the Maruts, of the Aśvins, Vaivasvata, Āditya, Dhaneśvara, Indra, Viṣṇu, Savitṛ, Bhava, Candra, Divākara, and of the lord of waters, and of the host of Sādhyas, of Dhātṛ, of the Pitṛs, of Rudra with his host, of Sarasvatī, of the host of Siddhas, etc and then returned to Śūrpāraka, and from this tīrtha at the sea they came to Prabhāsa, where they offered libations to the Pitṛs and gods, and where Yudhiṣṭhira practised austerities for twelve days, subsisting upon air and water, and performing ablutions day and night, surrounded by fires kindled on all sides. There came to them Balarāma, Kṛṣṇa, Śāmba, etc Kārṣṇi, the grandson of Śini, and other Vṛṣṇis, and heard what had happened to them, and wept when they saw the Pāṇḍavas so exceedingly lean . Bala Rāma . Sātyaki, citing Śaibya, etc who did the work for Yayāti, recommended that Rāma, Kṛṣṇa, Pradyumna, Śāmba, himself, Aniruddha, Gada, Ulmuka, Bāhuka, Bhānu, Nītha, the young hero Niśatha, Sāraṇa, and Cārudeṣṇa should lead the united army of the Vṛṣṇis, Bhojas, Andhakas, Sāttvatas, and Śūras against the Dhārta rāṣṭras and kill them in battle, and that Abhimanyu should rule the earth until Yudhiṣṭhira had fulfilled his vow. Kṛṣṇa said that the Pāṇḍavas would never accept the sovereignty unless it were won by their own prowess, and Yudhiṣṭhira assented to the words of Kṛṣṇa, saying, that as Kṛṣṇa alone knew him, so he alone knew Kṛṣṇa, who would perceive when the time had come for bravery, and he and Sātyaki would then defeat Suyodhana. Then the Yadus returned home, and the Pāṇḍavas continued their journey accompanied by Lomaśa, and came to the river Payoṣṇī . Lomaśa spoke of sacrifices that had formerly been performed at the Payoṣṇī he who bathed in the Payoṣṇī would obtain the same lokas as Gaya. Having bathed in the Payoṣṇī they went to Vaidūryaparvata and Narmadā, where they, according to the exposition of Lomaśa, visited all the tīrthas and shrines, giving gifts to the brahmans by thousands. Lomaśa said that this was the junction between the Tretā and Dvāpara age, where a person is freed of all his sins, and that here was performed the sacrifice of Śaryāti, Yudhiṣṭhira wished to hear more about it . Sukanyopākhyāna . Lomaśa recommended to Yudhiṣṭhira to visit the above named lake, and Sikatākṣa, and the Saindhava wood, and Puṣkara, and Ārcīkaparvata . Here the ṛṣis eat rice boiled in milk. Here is the Yamunā, where Kṛṣṇa performed austerities there is the holy spring of Indra, where Dhātṛ, Vidhātṛ, and Varuṇa rose upwards. In the Yamunā Māndhātṛ and Somaka Sāhadevi performed sacrifices . Māndhātrupā khyāna . Jantūpākhyāna . Plakṣāvataraṇa gamana . Śyenakapotīya . When they arrived at the hermitage of Śvetaketu
Tiṣya1, name of a nakṣatra = Pusnya. c, .
Tiṣya2, name of the fourth yuga = Kali . b, . b, .
Tiṭṭibha, an Asura .
Tittira, pl a people .
Tittiri1, a certain breed of horses, .
Tittiri2, a serpent .
Tittiri3, a brahman, brother of Vaiśampāyana . c, .
Tomara, pl a people .
Toraṇa = Śiva .
Toraṇasphāṭikā, name of a sabhā .
Toyātman1 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Śiva .
Traibali, a muni .
Traiśīrṣa, adj. .
Traigarta1 = Suśarman, .
Traigarta2, adj. .
Traigarta, pl a people = Trigarta, pl .
Traigartaka, adj. .
Traigartī = Yaśodharā, .
Trailokyagoptṛ = Śiva .
Trailokyakartṛ = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva, .
Trailokyanātha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Trailokyapati = Indra, .
Trailokyarāja = Indra, .
Trailokyeśa = Indra, .
Traipura .
Traipura, pl a people .
traividya, trayī. Do adj .
Traiyambaka, adj. .
Trasadasyu, an ancient king . Paurukutsa.
Trāsana = Śiva .
trayī, .
Tretā, name of the second yuga . In the T. sacrifices are introduced, religion decreases by a fourth, Nārāyaṇa is red, etc . b, . b, . Tretāyuga.
Tretā = Sūrya, .
Tretāyuga, the second yuga . c, . b, . e, . Tretā.
Tribhuvanaśreṣṭha = Viṣṇu, .
Tribhuvanavibhu = Śiva, .
Tribhuvaneśvara1 = Brahmán, .
Tribhuvaneśvara2 = Indra, .
Tribhuvaneśvara3 = Viṣṇu, .
Tribhuvaneśvara, dual = Aruṇa and Garuḍa, . Do. pl .
Tribhuvaneśvarī = Durgā, .
Tricakṣus = Kṛṣṇa, .
Triśaṅku1, an ancient king . Mataṅga.
Triśaṅku = Śiva .
Triśiras = Viśvarupa, the son of Tvaṣṭṛ, .
Triśīrṣa = Śiva .
Triśṛṅga, a mountain .
Triśukla = Śiva
Triśūlahasta = Śiva, .
Triśūlakhāta, name of a tīrtha .
Triśūlapāṇi = Śiva, .
Triśūlapāṇeḥ sthāna, a tīrtha .
Triśūlavarapāṇi = Śiva .
Tridaśa, pl . Do. sg. = Śiva .
Tridaśa, sg .
Tridaśaśārdūla = Indra, .
Tridaśaśreṣṭha = Śiva, .
Tridaśādhipa = Indra, q.v.
Tridaśādhipati = Indra, .
Tridaśādhyakṣa = Viṣṇu .
Tridaśadviṣ, pl. = Asura, pl .
Tridaśapati = Indra, .
Tridaśapuṅgava = Śiva, .
Tridaśāri, pl. = Asura, pl .
Tridaśarṣi, pl. = Devarṣi, pl .
Tridaśavarātmaja = Arjuna, .
Tridaśavarāvaraja = Viṣṇu, .
Tridaśeśa1 = Brahmán, . Do. = Indra, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Tridaśeśvara1 = Indra, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do pl .
Tridaśeśvaranātha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Tridaśendra = Indra .
Tridaṇḍadhṛk = Śiva .
Tridhāman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Tridhātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Tridhātu = Kṛṣṇa, .
Tridiva, .
Tridivā, a river .
Tridiveśa, pl .
Tridiveśvara = Indra, q.v. Do. pl .
Trigaṅga, name of a tīrtha . g, .
Trigarta1, an ancient king .
Trigarta2 = Kṣemaṅkara, .
Trigarta2 = Suśarman, . Traigarta1.
Trigarta, pl a people, especially five brothers, Trigarta princes . e, . Traigarta, pl. Traigartaka.
Trigartādhipati = Suśarman, .
Trigartarāj = Suśarman, .
Trigartarāja1 = Kṣemaṅkara, . Do. = Suśarman, . Do. = Suratha, .
Trigartarājan1, v. Trigartarāja.
Trigartarājan2 = Suśarman, .
Trigartarājan3 = Sūryavarman, .
Triguṇa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Trijaṭa = Śiva .
Trijaṭā, a Rākṣasī . Rākṣasī.
Trijaṭin = Śiva
Trikakud1 = Śiva .
Trikakud2 = Kṛṣṇa
Trikakuda = Kṛṣṇa, .
Trikāladhṛk = Śiva .
Trikarmarata = Śiva .
Trikūṭa1, a mountain .
Trikūṭa2, a mountain near Laṅkā . d, .
Trikūṭavat, a mountain. g, . Trikūṭa.
Trilocana = Śiva, q.v.
Trilokadhṛk = Viṣṇu .
Trilokagā = Gaṅgā, .
Trilokakṛt = Brahmán, .
Trilokapathagā = Gaṅgā, .
Trilokarāja = Indra, .
Trilokātman = Viṣṇu .
Trilokeśa1 = Brahmán, .
Trilokeśa2 = Śiva, .
Trilokeśa3 = Indra, .
Trilokeśa4 = Viṣṇu, .
Trilokeśvara1 = Viṣṇu, Do. = Indra, .
Triṇayana = Śiva, q.v.
Triṇetra = Śiva .
Triṇāciketa, . Do. = Mahāpuruṣa .
Tripada = Viṣṇu .
Tripāda, a Daitya. u, .
Tripathagā = Gaṅgā, .
Tripathagāminī = Gaṅgā, .
Tripiṣṭapa1, . Triviṣṭapa.
Tripiṣṭapa2, a tīrtha .
Tripura, the triple city of the Asuras . c, . d . The Asuras had three cities in heaven one of iron, one of silver, and one of gold Indra could not vanquish them the gods repaired to Rudra and promised him the creatures slain in every sacrifice. Śiva then made Gandha mādana and Vindhya the two bamboo poles of his chariot, the earth his chariot, Śeṣa the akṣa, the moon and sun the two wheels, Elāpatra and Puṣpadanta the two pins of the yoke, the Malaya mountain the yoke, Takṣaka the string for tying the yoke to the pole, and the creatures the traces of the steeds, the four Vedas his four steeds, the Upavedas the bridle bits, Gāyatrī and Sāvitrī the reins, om the whip, Brahmán the driver, Mandara the bow, Vāsuki the bowstring, Viṣṇu the shaft, Agni the arrow head, Vāyu the wings of the shaft, Yama Vaivasvata the feathers in its tail, lightning the whetting stone, Meru the standard. Aed by gods and ṛṣis he ated a posture called after his own name, and stood immovable for years. When, however, the three cities came together in the firmament he shot that terrible shaft of three knots, inspired with the Yuga fire and composed of Viṣṇu and Soma. While the triple city began to burn, Pārvatī repaired thither to behold the sight she had on her lap a child having a bald head with five tufts of hair on it Indra endeavoured to strike the child with the thunderbolt, but Mahādeva paralysed his arm. Indra, with the gods, repaired to Brahmán, who, understanding that it was Śiva, came with them and recited a hymn . Mahādeva became gratified, and the arm of Indra reassumed its natural state, . g, . Cf foll.
Tripurā, a city .
Tripuraghna, Tripuraghātin, Tripuraharta = Śiva, q.v.
. . The first combat between the gods and the Asuras was about Tāraka . The Daityas were defeated. Then the three sons of Tāraka, by practising austerities, obtained boons from Pitāmaha residing in three cities, we will rove over the earth after years we will come together, and our three cities also will become united into one that foremost one amongst the gods who will, with one shaft, pierce those three cities united into one will be the cause of our destruction. The great Asura Maya constructed the three cities Tārakākṣas of gold in heaven, Kamalākṣas of silver in the welkin, and Vidyunmālins of iron on the earth all in such a way as to revolve in a circle each yojanas in breadth and in length . Those three Daitya kings soon assailed the three worlds, and millions upon millions of flesh eating Dānavas, who had before been defeated by the gods, came to them and settled in the three cities Maya supplied them with everything by his illusive power. Tārakākṣas heroic son Hari, by penances, obtained from Brahmán a boon a lake in his city capable of reviving the dead when thrown into it. They then exterminated all cities and towns, drove the gods from all places, and roamed over celestial forests, etc and the asylums of Ṛ. Indra, with the Maruts, having tried in vain to pierce the three cities, repaired with the gods to Brahmán, complaining of the Asuras. Brahmán said that no one else, save Sthāṇu, could pierce the three cities with one shaft. They all, with Brahmán and Ṛ sought Bhava, who had perfect knowledge of the Soul, beholding in him those diverse forms that each had individually conceived in his own heart, and praised him . After the fears of P and Ṛ. had been dispelled, Brahmán explained the matter to him. He said that they should fight united and with half his energy as they said that they could not bear half his energy, he promised to slay the foes endued with half of their united energy. From that time Śaṅkara came to be called Mahādeva. Gathering portions from all forms in the three worlds they let Viśvakarman construct him a chariot they made Viṣṇu the point, Soma the head, and Agni the staff of the arrow Earth the chariot Mandara its axle Gaṅgā its jaṅghā the points of the compass its ornaments the constellations its shaft the Kṛta age its yoke Vāsuki its kūbara Himavat and Vindhya its apaskara and adhiṣṭhāna the Udaya and Asta mountains its wheels the Ocean its other axle the seven Ṛ.s its pariṣkara Day and Night, etc its anukarṣa the planets and the stars its wooden fence dharma, artha, and kāma its triveṇu the herbs and the creepers, etc its bells the sun and moon were made its wheels Day and Night its wings the ten foremost of Snakes Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc its shaft the sky its yoke the clouds Saṃvartaka and Balāhaka the leathern strings of the yoke the twilight, Dhṛti, Medhā, Sthiti, Sannati, and the firmament with planets and stars its covering skins the regents of the world its steeds the cardinal and subsidiary directions its reins Vaṣaṭkāra the goad Gāyatrī the string attached to the goad the four auspicious days the traces of its steeds the P. presiding over them the pins Action and Truth and Penance and Profit its chords Mind the ground Speech the track it was resplendent with lightning and Indras bow that space of time, which, on a former occasion, had, in the sacrifice of Īśāna, been fixed as a year, the bow the goddess Sāvitrī the bowstring a celestial coat of mail was made, sprung from the wheel of Time the golden mountain Meru was made its flagstaff the clouds with flashes of lightning its banners. Śankara placed upon it his own celestial weapons. Making the sky its flagstaff he placed upon it his bull Brahmadaṇḍa, Kāladaṇḍa, Rudradaṇḍa, and Fever became the protectors of the sides of the chariot Atharvan and Aṅgiras the protectors of the wheels the Ṛgveda, the Sāmaveda, and the Purāṇas stood in front of the chariot the itihāsa and the Yajurveda were the protectors of the rear all sacred Speeches and Sciences stood around it, and all hymns and Vaṣaṭkāra om in the van. Having made the year with the six seasons his bow, he made his own sha the bowstring Viṣṇu, Agni, and Soma the arrow the universe is said to consist of Agni and Soma, and similarly to consist of Viṣṇu, who is the soul of Bhava. Śaṅkara placed on that bow his wrath, the unbearable fire of anger, born of the wrath of Bhṛgu and Aṅgiras. The Wind was caused to breathe fragrance. The great Ṛ G Aps. praised Mahādeva when he was about to ascend the chariot. He asked to get as his driver him who was superior to himself the gods prevailed upon Brahmán to become his driver. The great Ṛ G Aps. praised Mahādeva after he had ascended the chariot. His bull uttered tremens roars, so that many descendants and followers of Tāraka breathed their last. Frightful portents appeared. In consequence of the weight of Soma, etc the chariot seemed to sink. Then Nārāyaṇa, issuing out of the point of the arrow, assumed the form of a bull and raised the chariot. Rudra, standing on the head of his bull and the back of his steeds, beholding the Dānava city, cut off the teats of the horses and clove the hoofs of the bull from that date the hoof of the bovine species came to be cloven and the horses to be without teats. He had united the Pāśupata weapon with the shaft. When the three cities became united, the Si and great Ṛ. uttered the word Jaya aing Maheśvara. When he had shot his arrow the cities began to fall n, and burning the Asuras, he threw them into the western ocean. The firs, born of his wrath, he quenched, lest it should reduce the three worlds to ashes. Ṛ and the three worlds gratified Sthāṇu. Tripuramardana, Tripuranāśana, Tripurānataka, Tripurāntakara, Tripurārdana = Śiva, q.v.
Tripuravāsin, pl. . d, .
Tripuravighna = Śiva, .
Trirāva, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Trirvyūha = Viṣṇu, .
Trisāman = Viṣṇu .
trisauparṇa, adj .
Trisauvarṇa = Śiva .
Trisrotasī, a river .
Tristhāna, a tīrtha belonging to Śiva. f, .
trisuparṇa, adj .
Trisuvarcaka, name of a fire .
Trita, a ṛṣi, brother of Ekata and Dvita . b, . c, . b, .
Trivāra v. Trirāva.
Trivargamukhya = Dharma, .
Trivartman = Viṣṇu, .
Trivikrama1 = Viṣṇu, . Do. = Śiva .
Trivikramagati = Viṣṇu, .
Triviṣṭapa1, .
Triviṣṭapa2 = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva .
Triyuga1 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Śiva .
Truṭi, a mātṛ. u, .
Tryakṣa = Śiva, q.v. .
Tryakṣa, pl .
Tryakṣan = Śiva, .
Tryambaka1 = Śiva, q.v. Do a Rudra . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Tryambikāmbikanātha = Śiva .
Tṛṇabindu, a ṛṣi .
Tṛṇabindusaras .
Tṛṇaka, an ancient king .
Tṛṇāni = Śiva .
Tṛṇapa, a Gandharva .
Tṛṇasomāṅgiras, a ṛṣi .
Tṛptātṛptavicārin = Śiva .
Tṛtīyā, a river .
Tubha, v. Stubha.
Tuhara, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Tuhāra, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Tuhuṇḍa1, an Asura .
Tuhuṇḍa2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Tuhuṇḍa3, pl a people .
Tukhāra, pl v. Tuṣāra, pl.
Tulādhāra, a merchant. b, .
. b . Bhīṣma said There was once a brahman Jājali, living in a forest he proceeded to the sea shore and practised penances for many years. Living within the waters he roamed through all the worlds with the speed of mind. Once, unseen by Ra he thought there is none equal to me Pś. said to him that even the celebrated Tulādhāra was not worthy of saying such words. Ṛ. wished to see Tulādhāra Ra. raised him from the sea and showed him the road. Arrived at Vārāṇasī, he met Tulādhāra and spoke to him thus. Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma described those difficult feats that Jājali had performed before while he stood as a wooden post rapt in yoga, a pair of kuliṅga birds built their nest on his head, laid their eggs there, their young ones came out, and only when the latter did not come back, even after a month, Jājali left that spot. Then he began to slap his armpits and proclaim loudly have won great merit. Then an invisible voice in the sky said Thou art not equal to the wise Tulādhāra at Vārāṇasī even he is not fit to say what thou sayest. Jājali, filled with wrath and desirous of meeting with Tulādhāra, began to roam over the whole earth, observing the vow of silence and passing the night at that spot where evening overtook him. After a considerable time he reached Vārāṇasī and saw Tulādhāra engaged in selling miscellaneous articles . Tulā dhāra stood up and saluted him, mentioning his dealings with the birds, etc. . Asked by Jājali, the vaiśya Tulādhāra discoursed to him upon the ways of morality in every creature that is endued with the five senses live all the deities, Sūrya, etc. the goat is Agni the sheep is Varuṇa the horse is Sūrya Earth is Virāj the cow and the calf are Soma the man that sells these can never obtain success...In days of yore many Ṛ. rebuked Nahuṣa for having slain a cow and a bull in order to purify Nahuṣa, however, they divided that sin in parts, and converting the fragments into diseases, threw them among all creatures, but declared that they should not be able to pour libations in his sacrifice . Jājali said that Tulādhāras trines smacked of atheism, which the latter denied, discoursing on sacrifice, saying that brahmans, having given up the sacrifice ordained for them, had betaken themselves to the performance of sacrifices that are for kṣatriyas . Instead of all animals the rice ball is a worthy offering in sacrifices all rivers are as sacred as the Sarasvatī, and all mountains are sacred the soul is itself a tīrtha not wander about on the earth to visit sacred places . Tulādhāra caused Jājali to summon the birds that had been reared by the latter they made answer agreeably to the religion of ahiṃsā . Faith is the daughter of Sūrya, etc quoting a verse sung by Brahmán, exalting Faith the food of a liberal usurer is acceptable, but not the food of a miser ...want of faith is a high sin faith is a cleanser of sins. After a short while, Tulādhāra and Jājali both ascended to heaven. Many truths of this kind were spoken of by Tulādhāra Jājali, having heard his words, betook himself to tranquillity .
Tumbavīṇa = Śiva .
Tumbīvīṇāpriya = Śiva .
Tumbuma, pl a people .
Tumburu, a Gandharva . b, . b, . Gandharva.
Tuṇḍa1, a Rākṣasa .
Tuṇḍa2, a prince .
Tuṇḍikera1, pl a people .
Tuṇḍikera2, sg. .
Tuṅgaka, a sacred forest. . In days of old, when the Vedas had been lost, the ṛṣi Sārasvata of Aṅgiras race seated at ease on the upper garments of the ṛṣis in the forest of T. made the ṛṣis recollect all that they had learned before, only by distinctly pronouncing the syllable om. There the ṛṣis and the gods, Varuṇa, Agni, Prajāpati, Hari Nārāyaṇa, Mahādeva, and Pitāmaha, appointed Bhṛgu to officiate at a sacrifice, and Bhṛgu once more performed the agnyādhāna for all these ṛṣis, gratifying Agni with a portion of clarified butter according to the ordinance. A visit here destroys all sins, and dwelling there for a month with subdued senses, etc leads to the Brahmaloka and delivers ones race, .
Tuṅgakāraṇya = Tuṅgaka
Tuṅgaveṇā, a river .
turaga, pl. .
Turvasu, son of Yayāti and Devayānī .
Tuṣāra, pl a people .
Tuṣāragiri = Himavat, .
Tuṣita = Mahāpuruṣa .
Tuṣita, pl a class of gods .
Tuṣṭa = Viṣṇu .
Tuṣṭājyapā = Śiva .
Tvaṣṭādhara, a son of Śukra .
Tvaṣṭṛ, name of a god, one of the Ādityas . h, . u, . g, . Prajāpati, Viśvakarma.
Tvaṣṭṛ = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Tvaṣṭṛputra = Viśvarūpa, .
Tvāṣṭra1 = Viśvarūpa, .
Tvāṣṭra2 = Vṛtra, .
Tvāṣṭra, adj. . b, .
Tvāṣṭrī . Sañjñā.
tyāgaśāstra, .
Uccaiḥśravas1, a celestial horse . u, . Aśvarāja.
Uccaiḥśravas2, son of Avikṣit .
Ucchikha, a serpent .
Ucchṛṅga, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Uśanas, v. Śukra1.
Uśaṅgava, an ancient king .
Uśīnara, an ancient king . Auśīnara2.
Uśīnara2 = Vṛṣadarbha, .
Uśīnara3, a Vṛṣṇi .
Uśīnara, pl a people .
Uśīnarasuta = Śaibya8, .
Uśīrabīja, a mountain .
Udadhi .
Udagra = Śiva .
Udakakrīḍaṇa, name of a place .
Udakapati = Varuṇa, .
Udāna, one of the vital breaths . b, . b, . g, . j, . b, . g, . Do. = Śiva .
Udapāna, one or more tīrthas . b Although the Sarasvatī seems to be lost there, yet, owing to the succu lence of the herbs and the moistness of the land, holy persons know the river . There the great ascetic Trita had lived and drunk soma in a pit, where his two brothers had left him, and therefore were cursed by him. Requested by Janamejaya Vaiśampāyana related In a former yuga there were three brothers who were ascetics Ekata, Dvita, and Trita, like to Prajāpati, having by their tapas won Brahmaloka, and being blessed with children. At last their father Gautama died, having passed a long life here. Those kings who had been his yajamānas continued to pay respect to his sons. Once, thinking of performing a sacrifice and having received animals from their yajamānas, those maharṣis came towards the east. Trita was walking in front, Ekata and Dvita in his rear, bringing up the animals. Ekata and Dvita thought of taking the kine away and deserting Trita. In the night they saw a wolf. Trita ran in fright and fell into a deep pit on the bank of the Sarasvatī. Though hearing his wails of woe, his brothers deserted him. Trita feared to die because he had not earned the merit of drinking soma, and in imagination performed a sacrifice, himself being the hotṛ and uttering the ṛces, yajuṣes, and sāmans . Bṛhaspati prevailed upon the gods to go there lest Trita should become angry and create other gods. Trita duly gave them their shares with proper mantras they granted him boons that the gods should deliver him, and that he who bathes in that well shall have the end which is attained by persons who have drunk soma. At these words the Sarasvatī, with her waves, appeared within that well. Raised aloft by her, Trita emerged and worshipped the gods. Meeting his brothers he cursed them, saying that they should become wolves and have for offspring leopards and bears and apes, .
Udāpekṣin, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Udaraśāṇḍilya, a ṛṣi .
Udāradhī = Viṣṇu .
Udarākṣa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Udāvarta, a king .
Udaya, the mountain where the sun rises. . Udayāeala, Udayagiri.
Udayācala = Udaya .
Udayagiri = Udaya .
Udayendu, a city of the Kurus .
Udbhasa, pl a people .
Udbhava1, a prince .
Udbhava2 = Viṣṇu .
Udbhid = Śiva .
Udbhijāḥ = Śiva .
Uddālaka, a ṛṣi . b, . i, .
Uddālaki, a ṛṣi .
Uddhava, a Vṛṣṇi .
Uḍhra, v. Uḍra.
Udīcya, pl a people .
Udīrṇa = Viṣṇu .
Uḍra, pl a people . Oḍra.
Udrapāraka, a serpent .
Uḍrarāja .
Udumbara = Viṣṇu .
Uḍupa = Soma, .
Uḍupati = Soma, .
Uḍurāj = Soma, .
Udvaha1, a prince .
Udvaha2, name of a wind. j The wind which causes Soma and other luminaries to arise, and which sucks up the waters in the oceans and imparts them to the clouds and thereafter to Parjanya, is called U .
Udyat, a mountain .
Udyoga = Udyogaparvan . c, . Cf .
Udyogaparvan, the fifth book of the Mhbhr . Udyoga.
Ugra1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Ugra2, a prince .
Ugra3, a son of Kavi. b, .
Ugra4 = Śiva, q.v. Do. = Viṣṇu .
ugra, name of a caste, .
Ugraśravas1, son of Lomaharṣaṇa and generally named Sauti, who recited the Mhbhr. to Śaunaka . the following synonyms Laumaharṣaṇi, . Lomaharṣaṇaputra, . Paurāṇika, q.v. Sauti, Sūta, Sūtaja, Sutanandana, Sūtaputra, q.v.
Ugraśravas2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Ugradaṇḍa = Śiva .
Ugradhanvan = Skanda, .
Ugraka, a serpent .
Ugrasena1, brother of Janamejaya .
Ugrasena2, a Devagandharva .
Ugrasena3, a prince .
Ugrasena4, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Ugrasena5, son of the elder Parikṣit .
Ugrasena6, king of the Vṛṣṇis, father of Kaṃsa . c, . Āhuka, Bhojarāja, Kukurādhipa.
Ugrasena7 = Janaka, .
Ugrasenasuta = Kaṃsa, .
Ugrasenānī = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ugratejas1, a serpent . Do. = Śiva .
Ugrātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ugrayāyin, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Ugrāyudha1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Ugrāyudha2, a Pāñcāla prince .
Ugrāyudha3, a Kuru warrior .
Ugrāyudha4 = Śiva, .
Ugrāyudhasuta, a prince .
Ugreśa = Śiva, .
Ujjālaka, name of a lake .
Ujjānaka, name of a tīrtha . y By bathing in U. and at the hermitage of Ārṣṭiṣeṇa, and at the hermitage of Piṅgā, one is purified from sins, etc .
Ujjayana, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Ujjayanta, a mountain in the country of the Surāṣṭras .
Uktha, name of a fire .
Ukthayajña = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ulmucu, v. Unmucu.
Ulmuka, a Vṛṣṇi .
Ulūka1, Kaitavya, son of Śakuni . the following synonyms Śākuni, . Kaitava, . Kaitavya, .
Ulūka2, a Nāga .
Ulūka3, one or more ṛṣis . b, .
Ulūka4 = Bṛhanta, .
Ulūka5, pl a people .
ulūka, pl. . Prāvārakarṇa.
Ulūkadūtāgamana .
. . When the Pāṇḍavas had encamped on the bank of the Hiraṇvatī, the Kauravas also fixed their encampment. Then Duryodhana consulted with Karṇa, etc and sent Ulūka to the Pāṇḍavas and Somakas in order to irritate them still more, with insulting messages to Yudhiṣṭhira, Kṛṣṇa, etc. before Arjuna he should mention the Kāmbojas, etc among his troops know that the Gāṇḍīva is full cubits long . Ulūka repeated the messages to the Pāṇḍavas, etc and repeated his words to Arjuna once more Bhīmasena and the rest became furious Kṛṣṇa counselled Ulūka to retire in time Ulūka once more repeated his words they became still more enraged, especially Bhīma, who said that he would certainly drink Duḥśāsanas blood also Sahadeva, etc gave him answers for Duryodhana Sahadeva would slay Ulūka before the eyes of Śakuni, and then Śakuni himself . Arjuna said that Duryodhanas contrivance of seeking cover behind Bhīṣma would be of no avail, as he would himself slay Bhīṣma the same said Śikhaṇḍin Dhṛṣṭadyumna would slay Droṇa with all his followers and friends. Ulūka related it all to Duryodhana. Messengers instructed by Karṇa promulgated array to morrow before sunrise . Dhṛṣṭadyumna began to select combatants in order to pit them against particular warriors of the hostile force .
Ulūpī, daughter of the serpent king Kauravya, wife of Arjuna . U. is presumably the mother of Irāvat . Bhuja gātmajā, Bhujagendrakanyā, Bhujagottamā, Kauravī, Kaura vyaduhitṛ, Kauravyakulanandinī, Pannaganandinī, Panna gasutā, Pannagātmajā, Pannageśvarakanyā, Pannagī, Uragātmajā. also Kauravya .
Ulūta, see Utūla.
Umā, a goddess, daughter of Himavat, wife of Śiva . d, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . b, . b, . d, . f, . g, . also the following synonyms Ambikā, . Āryā, . Bhīmā, . Śailaputrī, . Śailarājasutā, . Śākambharī, q.v. Śarvāṇī, . Deveśī, . Devī, foll. passim, . Durgā, q.v. Gaurī, . Girisutā, Girivarātmajā, . Kālī, . Mahābhīmā, . Mahādevī, q.v. Mahākālī, . Maheśvarī, . Māheśvarī, . Parvatarājakanyā, . Pārvatī, . Rudrāṇī, . Rudrapatnī, Tribhuvaneśvarī, . The following names of Umā occur in two separate hymns, viz . and, Āryā, Brahmaṇyā, Brahmavidyā, Caṇḍā, Caṇḍī, Śākambhārī, Śvetā, Dhūmrākṣī, Durgā, Hiraṇyākṣī, Jātavedasī, Jayā, Kaiṭabhanāśinī, Kālī, Kāpālī, Kapilā, Karālī, Kālyāyanī, Kauśikī, Kokamukhā, Kṛṣṇā, Kṛṣṇacchavisamā, Kṛṣṇapiṅgalā, Kumārī, Mahādevī, Mahākālī, Mahiṣāsuranāśinī, Mandara vāsinī, Pītavāsinī, Sāvitrī, Skandamātṛ, Siddhasenānī, Tāriṇī, Varavarṇinī, Vijayā, Virūpākṣī .
Umā = Sarasvatī, .
Umādhava, Umākānta = Śiva .
. b Nārada said Once, Śiva on Himavat, the resort of Si. and Cā practised severe penances, surrounded by Aps etc. . Then came Umā and with her hands covered the eyes of Śiva from behind, and darkness arose all around but suddenly the darkness disappeared a third eye appeared on his forehead and consumed the mountain Umā stood before him with her hands joined he directed benignant looks towards the mountain, which, in a moment, was restored to its former condition. Umā asked why his eastern, northern, and western faces are so handsome, and the southern so terrible why his matted locks are tawny and erect why his throat is blue why he has always the Pināka in his hand why he is always a brahmacārin with matted locks . Śiva promised to explain it to her . Śiva answered the above questions In days of yore Tilottamā, created by Brahmán, circumambulated me in whatever direction she turned, a new face of mine appeared through my yoga power with my eastern face exercise the sovereignty of the universe with my northern sport with thee with my western ordain the happiness of creatures with my southern destroy all creatures. In order to good to all creatures. In days of yore, Indra, desirous of acquiring my prosperity hurled his thunderbolt at me, which scorched my throat. In order to accomplish the purposes of the gods. Umā Why hast thou selected a bull for thy vehicle Śiva In days of yore, Brahmán created Surabhi once, froth fell from one of her calves on my body my wrath scorched all the kine which became diversified in hue Brahmán pacified me and gave me this bull both as a vehicle and as a device. Umā Why t thou reside in the cemetery, abaning thy many abodes in heaven Śiva not see any spot that is more sacred than the cemetery, and my Bhūtas love to reside in such spots. Umā What are the indications of dharma Śiva Abstention from injury, etc. Umā What are the duties of the four castes Śiva enumerated them. Umā What are the common duties of all the castes Śiva Whenever the world is created, three eternal religions are created by Brahmán the Veda, the smṛti, and the practice of the righteous, etc. there are four classes of bhikṣus kuṭīcaka, bahūdaka, haṃsa, and paramahaṃsa . Umā What is the religion of the ṛṣis Śiva the Phenapas always gather the froth from the amṛta that Brahmán drank at a great sacrifice. The Vālakhilyas in the solar disc, ating the practice of the birds, live by picking up grains, clad in deer skins or bark of trees they are only as big as the joint of the thumb they have burnt all their sins by severe penances. The Cakracaras in the Somaloka, near to Pitṛloka, live by gleaning, devoted to compassion. The Samprakṣālas, Aśmakuṭṭas, and Dantolūkhalikas, near the gods Somapas and Ūṣmapas, live by gleaning, together with their wives, etc. . Umā What is the religion of the Vānaprasthas Śiva described it they attain to Brahmaloka or Somaloka. Umā What is the religion of the munis in their trines of perfection they live unrestrained in the forest, together with their wives. Śiva Their characteristics are the shaving of the head, yellow robes, passing the night at home, ablutions three times a hotra, samādhi, adherence to the path of the good, etc. All those duties of which have spoken before as belonging to forest recluses, are the duties of these also, etc. . Asked by Umā, Śiva said By fasts, etc one attains to heaven and sports with G. by maṇḍūkayoga and dīkṣā with the Nāgas by living with deer, etc one attains to Amarāvatī by subsisting upon air or water, fruits and roots, one attains to the riches of Y. and sports with Aps. by abaning ones body in the ocean, having lived in dependence only of himself, etc one attains to the world of Varuṇa by the same practices and piercing ones feet with a stone, one rejoices with the Gh others obtain Brahmaloka, Śakraloka, etc. . Asked by Umā, Śiva expounded the circumstances under which one may be promoted or degraded to a higher or lower order when reborn . Asked by Umā, Śiva discoursed as to how men succeed in ascending to heaven, and what words, thoughts, and acts are of importance in this respect and for acquiring a long life. This is the way that was indicated by Brahmán himself . Asked by Umā, Śiva discoursed about that conduct by which a man may attain to heaven, quoting Brahmán the unmerciful, etc sink into hell they who humiliate their preceptors and seniors are reborn as Śvapākas and Pukkasas. Then he explained why some men become possessed of wis or the contrary, blind, diseased, etc. what acts are faulty, and what faultless why some are observant of vows, some like Rā. in conduct, unmindful of homa and vaṣaṭkāra . Nārada said Now Śiva himself became desirous of hearing. Saying that Umā used to converse every day with Sāvitrī, etc who all regard their husbands as their gods, he questioned Umā about the duties of women half of my body is made up of half thy body thon...art the cause of the peopling of the earth. Umā said she would first consult the rivers, who, with the waters of all tīrthas, are approaching Śiva in order to enable him to perform his ablutions Sarasvatī, going to the ocean, etc. . Gaṅgā was selected for answering the question, and praised Umās modesty then Umā discoursed upon the duties of women in full. She should not cast her eyes on the moon or the sun or a tree that has a masculine name. The husband is the god of the woman. If a husband being poor, or diseased, or distressed, etc were to command his wife to accomplish anything improper or unrighteous, the wife should, without hesitation, so according to the practice allowable in time of distress, and she becomes entitled to a share in the merit acquired by her husband. Nārada said Śiva applauded Umā and dismissed the others Bh etc returned home . Asked by Ṛ Śiva discoursed on the glory of Vāsudeva, i.e. Kṛṣṇa, q.v. . Nārada said At the conclusion of Śivas speech loud roars were heard in the firmament, etc. Some of Ṛ. set out on a tīrthayātrā, others returned whence they came.
Umāpati = Śiva, q.v.
Umlocā, an Apsaras .
uñchavṛtti, foll.
. b Bhīṣma said M ṛ Nārada wanders through all the worlds like Vāyu, not obstructed by anything once he repaired to the abode of Indra, who asked him if he had perceived any wonderful incident. Nārada recited the following story In the town of Mahāpadma, on the southern bank of the Gaṅgā, there lived a brahman of the Soma lineage, endued with amiability, etc. he was in great trouble with regard to the value of following the ordinances of the Vedas, or the śāstras, or the duties that eminent men of former times have performed . Then there came to him a wise brahman as a guest him he asked what he, having entrusted his duties as a householder to his son, should in order to perform the highest duty of men, as he had no respect for the religion of the Yatis, who depend upon alms. The guest said that he was himself perplexed, as heaven had many rs he told him to repair to Padma, the righteous Nāga, who lived in the city called after the Nāgas in the Naimiṣa forest, on the banks of the Gomatī, whence, in a former creation the wheel of righteous ness was set in motion, and where all the gods had, in days of old, performed a great sacrifice, and where king Māndhātṛ neglected Indra . The host became delighted, and passed the night happily conversing with his guest about the fourth mode of life the next morning, having dismissed his guest, he set out for the abode of the Nāga, was shown the way by an ascetic, and received by the beautiful wife of the Nāga as the Nāga had gone to draw the chariot of Sūrya for a month, and would be back in seven or eight days, he passed this time on the banks of the Gomalī . On the day the Nāgas of the city, seeing him abstaining from food and reciting mantras, came and asked him to eat but he wanted to keep his fast for eight days if then the Nāga chief had not come back, he would break his fast. Then the Nāgas returned . When the Nāga chief came home, he was informed by his wife about the brahmans arrival . The Nāga bted whether that brahman was a human being, as the Nāgas, even by As and ṛ, are considered to be endued with great energy his wife told him to go and speak to the guest without the wrath which is natural to Nāgas the Nāga himself also blamed wrath, citing Rāvaṇa and the sons of Kārtavīrya and Kārtavīrya himself . The Nāga met with the brahman on the banks of the Gomatī, engaged in Yoga and reciting the Vedas in order to dispel all evil from the Nāga he asked the Nāga whether he had seen anything wonderful in those regions where he had drawn the one wheeled chariot of Vivasvat. The Nāga described the wonders of which the Sun is the source . The most wonderful was that one in former times, at the hour of noon, a being came through the sky like a second sun and entered Sūrya . Sūrya declared it to be a brahman, who had attained to heaven on account of his having been crowned with success in the gleaning vow, and because he had gratified Bhava by praising him with saṃhitāḥ, and now he goes round the earth staying in the disc of Sūrya neither nor G As nor Pn. are superior to those creatures that attain to this excellent end . The brahman then betook himself formally to the practice of the uñcha vow, and having saluted the Nāga, he went to Cyavana Bhārgava, who initiated him and recited the story of the brahman in king Janakas palace to ṛ. Nārada Indra the foremost brahmans. During my battle with Rāma, the Vasus told it to me. The brahman proceeded to another forest .
Unmāda1, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Unmāda2 = Śiva .
Unmādaḥ sarvabhūtānāṃ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Unmādana = Śiva .
Unmātha, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Unmattaveśaprachanna = Śiva .
Unmeṣa = Śiva .
Unmuca, a ṛṣi . next.
Unmucu, a ṛṣi . the prec.
Unmukha v. Ulmuka.
Upacitra, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Upaśānta = Śiva .
Upaśruti, a goddess . b, repetition from
Upadeśakara = Śiva .
Upagahana, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Upajalā, a river.
Upakāra = Śiva .
Upakīcaka, pl followers of Kīcaka, .
Upakṛṣṇaka, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Upakṣaya = Śiva .
Upamanyu1, a brahman, disciple of Āyoda Dhaumya . Upamanyu was sent to look after the kine. His master forbade him to enjoy the alms he received before he had offered it to him then, being deprived by the master of the whole alms, and forbidden to go begging a second time, or to drink of the milk of the cows, or the froth that the calves threw out when sucking, he ate of the leaves of the arka plant, whence he became blind and fell into a pit. Āyoda Dhaumya told U. to glorify the Aśvins, which he did they gave him a cake which he would not apply without offering it to his preceptor, though the latter had himself formerly obtained a similar cake without offering it to his preceptor. The Aśvins gave him teeth of gold, while those of his preceptor were of iron, and restored him to sight, .
Upamanyu2, Vaiyāghrapadya, a ṛṣi . g Upamanyu said In the Kṛtayuga there was a ṛṣi named Vyāghrapāda. was born as his son and Dhaumya as my younger brother. Accompanied by Dhaumya, once came to the hermitage of certain ṛṣis. There saw milk, which appeared to me to be like to amṛta. Coming home, asked my mother to give me some food prepared with milk. Having no milk my mother was sorry. She then took a cake and boiled it into water and placed it before me, saying that it was milk. Knowing the nature of milk, understood that this was not milk this said to my mother, who then answered me that ascetics in the wood could not have milk. Whence shall we, who live at the river, the resort of the Vālakhilyas, obtain milk In the wilderness are no offspring of Surabhī. Then she told me to devote myself to Śaṅkara . Questioned by me about Śiva my mother then, in accordance with the discourses of the munis, described the diverse forms of Mahādeva . then applied myself to the practice of penances in order to gratify Śiva. After a thousand celestial years Mahādeva appeared to me in the form of Śakra riding on his elephant, but did not desire a boon from any other deity than Mahādeva. Questioned by Indra about the reason, stated Śiva to be the existent and the non existent, the manifest and the unmanifest, the eternal and immutable, etc and that there was nothing superior to Śiva . Mahādeva resides in the worlds named Bhū, etc. . In all the encounters of the gods, etc Bhava restores power to those who meet with destruction. It is Maheśvara who made futile the boons given to Andhaka, etc. . He is aed by yogins, etc. . Brahmán, etc always say that there is none higher than Mahādeva. His sign is worshipped by Brahmán, etc. The creatures bear only the signs of Mahādeva and his spouse, and those of Brahmán, etc. . shall never acknow ledge any other deity. Nor would take the fulfilment of all my wishes from any other deity. When had finished this speech, the celestial elephant became transformed into a white bull, on the back of which Mahādeva, with Umā, was seated . The Pāśupata weapon is superior to all other weapons such as the Brāhma, etc but the śūla is even superior. Śiva was also armed with the battle axe, which he had given to Rāma Jāmadagnya . He was surrounded by Brahmán, etc. . The deities praised Śiva by uttering diverse hymns . then praised him with a hymn and offered him arghya . Śiva became gratified and granted me the fulfilment of all my wishes. once more praised him and asked that and my kinsmen and friends might always eat food with milk. Śiva granted this, and that after the expiration of a kalpa should obtain the companionship of Śiva. Then the god disappeared, .
Upananda1, name of a tabour . Upanandaka3.
Upananda2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . next.
Upanandaka1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Upananda.
Upanandaka2, a serpent .
Upanandaka3, name of a tabour . Upananda1.
Upanandaka4, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Upāṅga, pl .
Upaniṣad, mostly pl . Mahopaniṣad.
Upaplava1, .
Upaplava2 = Śiva .
Upaplavya, name of a city near to the capital of the Matsya king Virāṭa . Upaplava.
Uparicara = Vasu, the Cedi king . c Bhīṣma said There was, in times past, a king named U the friend of Indra, and devoted to Hari Nārāyaṇa he won the sovereignty of the world in consequence of a boon he had obtained from Nārāyaṇa, and used to worship him with the Sātvata ritual, revealed in days of yore by Sūrya himself, etc. Indra gave him a share in his own seat and bed. The foremost of those conversant with the Pāñcarātra dwelled in his palaces. The seven ṛṣis, named the Citraśikhaṇḍins, uniting together, had on Meru promulgated an excellent treatise on duties they were the seven prakṛtis, and Svāyambhuva was the eighth they composed that treatise after having worshipped with penances Hari Nārāyaṇa for, celestial years, together with many other ṛṣis Nārāyaṇa ordered Sarasvatī to enter into the persons of these ṛṣis and became highly pleased with the treatise, which was in accordance with the Vedas, etc. . Nārāyaṇa said According to the authority of the scriptures have created Brahmán from grace, Rudra from my wrath, and yourselves as representing the prakṛti elements. Sūrya, etc. live and act in their respective spheres guided by your treatise Manu Svāyambhuva will declare the duties to the world, and so will Uśanas and Bṛhaspati, when they will arise then this science will be acquired by king Vasu from Bṛhaspati upon the death of that king this eternal treatise will disappear from the world. Then Nārāyaṇa disappeared. Subsequently, when Bṛhaspati was born in the Aṅgiras race in the Kṛta age, those seven ṛṣis charged him with the task of promulgating their treatise, which was consistent with the Upaniṣads and the branches of the Vedas. Then they proceeded to the place they chose for practising penances . Etymology of the name Bṛhaspati. King Vasu Uparicara became the fore most of Bṛhaspatis disciples, and studied at his feet that science of the Citraśikhaṇḍins. In his horse sacrifice Bṛhaspati became the hotṛ, the sons of Prajāpati, viz. Ekata, Dvita, and Trita, the sadasyas, together with Dhanuṣa, etc. no animals were slain in it Hari became gratified and came and took his share, visible to Vasu, but invisible to the others. At this Bṛhaspati became angry and hurled the sacrificial ladle with violence into the skies, saying Here place this as Nārāyaṇas share, he shall take it before my eyes. Yudhi ṣṭhira asked why Hari only took his share invisibly. Bhīṣma answered King Vasu and his sadasyas sought to pacify Bṛhas pati, saying that none should feel anger in this Kṛta age, as Hari himself did not feel anger, and none could see him save he to whom he became gracious. Then the ṛṣis, Ekata, Dvita, and Trita narrated that they had once undergone penances for thousands of years, to the north of Meru and on the shores of the milky ocean in order to behold Nārāyaṇa in his own form, then an incorporeal voice directed them to Śvetadvīpa on the northern shore of the milky ocean the inhabitants there are devoted to Nārāyaṇa, etc. and ae only one god Arrived there they could see nothing, blinded by the splenr of the deity they then, once more, set themselves to practise austerities for years, then they beheld the inhabitants . An incorporeal being addressed them from the sky, saying that the god could only be seen by these white men, etc. ye return, after the expiration of this Kṛta age when the Tretā age comes a great calamity will overtake the worlds, you shall then have to become the allies of the gods. Then Ekata, etc returned. Hearing this Bṛhaspati brought the sacrifice to completion. King U. ruled his subjects righteously, and at last, giving up his body, ascended to heaven. After some time he, through the curse of the brahmans, fell n and sank deep into the earth but even then he, by reciting sacred mantras having Nārāyaṇa for their deity, once more ascended to heaven through the grace of Nārāyaṇa . Yudhiṣṭhira asked why king Vasu, who was so devoted to Nārāyaṇa, did fall from heaven and sink beneath the surface of the earth. Bhīṣma cited the old narrative of a discourse between the ṛṣis and the gods. The gods once said to some brahmans that sacrifices should be performed by offering goats . The ṛṣis declared that, according to a Vedic śruti, by aja was to be understood seeds how can animals be slain in the Kṛta age Vasu was coming through the skies with his troops, etc and was asked to be their judge. Having first ascer tained what opinion was entertained by each of them, Vasu, moved by partiality for the gods, said that sacrifices should be performed with animals. The ṛṣis became very angry, and cursed him to fall n from heaven and sink below the surface of the earth. He immediately fell, but at the command of Nārāyaṇa, Vasus memory did not leave him. The gods came to his hole and said that he should have the vasor dhārā for his sustenance as long as he remained there. Then the gods and the ṛṣis went away. Vasu began to ae Hari and to recite in silence those sacred mantras which had come out of Nārāyaṇas mouth in days of yore, and worshipped him in the five sacrifices which are performed five times every day. Hari Nārāyaṇa then let Garuḍa take Vasu to Brahmaloka, .
Upasunda, an Asura, brother of Sunda . Asura.
Upaveda, pl. . d, .
Upaveṇā, a river .
Upavṛtta, pl a people .
Upayāja, a brahmarṣi . Kāśyapa, dual.
Upendra = Viṣṇu, .
Upendrā, a river .
Uraga1, mostly pl .
Uraga2, pl a people, .
Uragā, name of a city .
Uragapati = Kauravya, .
Uragātmajā = Ulūpī, .
Ūrdhvabāhu, a ṛṣi .
Ūrdhvabhāj, name of a fire .
Ūrdhvaśāyin = Śiva .
Ūrdhvadaṃṣṭrakeśa = Śiva .
Ūrdhvaga = Viṣṇu .
Ūrdhvagātman = Śiva .
Ūrdhvakeśa = Śiva .
Ūrdhvaliṅga = Śiva .
Ūrdhvaṃ kham iva menire = Śiva .
Ūrdhvaretas1, a brahman . Do. = Śiva .
Ūrdhvasaṃhanana = Śiva .
Ūrdhvavartman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Ūrdhvaveṇīdharā, a mātṛ. u, .
ūrjaskara said of fires, .
Ūrjaspati = Mahāpuruṣa .
Ūrjayoni, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Ūrjita, Ūrjitaśāsana = Viṣṇu .
Ūrmilā, wife of Yama .
Ūrṇanābha, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Ūrṇāyu, a Gandharva . . . .
Urukrama = Viṣṇu, .
Ūrva, a ṛṣi. c, . Aurva.
Urvaśī, an Apsaras, wife of Purūravas . b, . b, .
Urvaśī, name of a tīrtha. u, . next.
Urvaśītīrtha, name of a tīrtha . the prec.
Urvarā, an Apsaras. b, .
Urvī = Bhūmi, .
Uṣaṅgu1, a ṛṣi .
Uṣaṅgu2 = Śiva . Do v. Ṛṣadgu.
Uṣīnara, v. Uśīnara.
Uṣman, name of a fire . also, .
Uṣmapāḥ, a class of pitṛs or ṛṣis . b, . b, .
Uṣṇa, a region in Krauñcadvīpa .
Uṣṇapa, v. Uṣmapa.
Uṣṇaraśmi = Sūrya, .
Uṣṇīgaṅga, a tīrtha .
Uṣṇīnābha, a Viśvadeva .
Uṣṇīṣin = Śiva, .
Uṣṭrajihva, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Uṣṭrakarṇika, pl a people .
Utaṅka, v. Uttaṅka.
Utathya, a ṛṣi, son of Aṅgiras . b, . b, . j Vāyu said The beautiful Bhadrā, the daughter of Soma, was destined by her father to become the wife of the brahman U. of Aṅgiras race and she underwent severe austerities for this purpose. Then Atri invited U. and gave her to him. Varuṇa had coveted the girl from former times he came to the forest and stole her away, when she bathed in the Yamunā, and carried her to his wonderful city, aned with, lakes with palaces and Apsarases, etc. Having heard all this from Nārada, U. caused him to request Varuṇa to restore her . As Varuṇa refused, and Nārada related to U. that Varuṇa had seized him by the throat and driven him from his house, U. stopped the waters and drank them off, and caused. the earth to dry up the, lakes, and the Sarasvatī to become invisible, and the region to cease to be sacred. Then Varuṇa restored Bhadrā to U who then freed the world and Varuṇa from distress. Name thou a kṣatriya who is superior to U . Aṅgiras5, Āṅgirasa2.
Utathyaputra = Dīrghatamas, .
Utkala, pl a people .
Utkocaka, a tīrtha .
Utkrāthinī, a mātṛ. u
Utkrośa, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Utpalāvana, a tīrtha . o, .
Utpalāvatī, a river .
Utpalinī, a river .
Utpātaka, a tīrtha. r By bathing in U. in Aṣṭārakra and offering oblations to the pitṛs, and for twelve days abstaining from food one obtains to the merit of a horse sacrifice, .
Utsaṅga = Śiva .
Utsavasaṅketa, pl a people . Dhvajinyutsavasaṅketa.
Uttama, a prince .
Uttama, pl a people .
Uttamapūruṣa, .
Uttamaujas, a Pāñcāla prince, brother of Yudhāmanyu ʹ, ʹ, . Pāñcālya, Sṛñjaya.
Uttaṅka, a ṛṣi . U. was the disciple of Veda having resisted the temptations of the wife of Veda, he obtained leave to depart, but first wished to bring Veda some gratuity for his instruction, and having uttered this wish two times, he was ordered to procure the ear rings of Pauṣyas queen for the wife of Veda. Having met with a bull and a man mounted upon it, he ate of the dung and drank of the urine of that bull, as his master had formerly e. Coming to the abode of Pauṣya, he could not discover the queen before he had purified himself properly from the leavings of his last meal. He and Pauṣya cursed one another. Having obtained the ear rings, U. returned to his master. On the road Takṣaka, the king of the serpents, in the shape of a mendicant, stole the ear rings and proceeded to Nāgaloka. Indra, with the thunderbolt, made a hole through which U. entered the Nāgaloka, where he hymned the serpents. He there saw two damsels sitting over a loom, weaving a fabric with black and white threads, further, he saw a wheel with twelve spokes turned by six boys, and then a man mounted on a horse . At the injunction of the man U. blew into the anus of the horse, whence there issued flames of fire with smoke, which were about to consume the Nāgaloka. Takṣaka then gave back the ear rings and U. was borne by the horse to his masters abode. His master explained to him all he had seen during his journey. U. then proceeded to Hāstinapura and told Janamejaya, who had some time before returned victorious from Takṣaśilā, to burn Takṣaka, who had bitten Parikṣit to death, and caused Kāśyapa to turn back without relieving Parikṣit, at a snake sacrifice, . b, . b When Kṛṣṇa, on his way from Hāstinapura to Dvārakā, had entered the desert, he beheld U who enquired whether he came after having reconciled the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas. Kṛṣṇa told him the matter filled with wrath U. threatened to curse him Kṛṣṇa warned U. against destroying his penances . U. agreed that Kṛṣṇa should first tell him that faultless adhyātma, and Kṛṣṇa explained his own identity with the creator and destroyer of all things. R Dai Y G Rā N and Aps. have sprung from me etc. Dharma, whose essence is compassion for all creatures, is my eldest born offspring, and has sprung from my mind am Viṣṇu, Brahmán, and Śakra . He always acts as those beings in whose order he lives . U. pre vailed upon Kṛṣṇa to show him his eternal Vaiṣṇava or universal form, and praised Kṛṣṇa, who granted him the boon to have water wherever he wished for it by thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Once, when U. was wandering thirsty in the desert, and thought of Kṛṣṇa, he saw a naked Cāṇḍāla all besmeared with dirt, surrounded by a pack of s, and carrying a sword, and bow, and arrows from his urinary organs there issued copious streams of water he invited U. to accept this water U. refused and even censured Kṛṣṇa, the Cāṇḍāla dis appeared. Kṛṣṇa came and said that the Cāṇḍāla was Indra, whom he had ordered to give amṛta to U. in the form of water, and that Indra at first had refused to it, but at last had agreed on the condition that U. should accept it in that way. Kṛṣṇa ordained that on those days in which U. would feel a desire for water, there should rise clouds raining savoury water over this desert and that they should be named U. clouds even to this day such clouds shower rain on the arid desert Asked by Janamejaya about the penances of U Vaiśampāyana related that U.s preceptor Gautama, having permitted thousands of disciples to return home, was so pleased with the devotion of U. that he would not dismiss him, even after years, and decrepitude over took U. one day when he threw the load of fuel he had fetched on the earth, one of his matted locks, white as silver, had become entangled with the load and fell on the earth beholding that sign of old age, U. gave himself up to loud lamentations the beautiful daughter of his preceptor, at the command of her father, sought to hold the tears of U. in her hands, but her hands seemed to burn with the dropping tears, and she was obliged to let them fall on the earth the earth was unable to hold them. Asked by Gautama, U. explained the matter. Gautama permitted him to leave him as U. spoke of the fee, Gautama said that he was already highly gratified and that if U. became a young man of sixteen years, he would give him his daughter in marriage. U. again became a youth and accepted the maiden. As he spoke of the fee to his preceptors wife, Ahalyā said that she was already gratified. U however, insisted, and Ahalyā then commanded him to bring her the celestial ear rings which were borne by the wife of Saudāsa, who had become a cannibal. Gautama blamed Ahalyā that she had sent U. to the cannibal. Ahalyā said that she had e it unknowingly, and that Gautama would protect U. U. met Saudāsa in a deserted forest . Saudāsa was of frightful mien, wearing a long beard smeared with human blood, and looking like a second Yama he congratulated himself that he had met U. at the sixth hour of the day when he was in search of food U. maintained that while one is employed for the sake of his preceptor, one should not be injured at last they agreed that when he had brought his preceptor the ear rings he should come back Saudāsa told U. to go and see the queen Madayantī, as he could not himself see her at the sixth hour. Madayantī told U. to bring her some sign from her husband, as these ear rings, when placed on the earth, would be stolen by the Nāgas, if worn by one who is impure from eating, they would be taken away by the Yakṣas, and if the wearer fell asleep, the gods would take them away also the maharṣis and the Rākṣasas watch for opportunities for carrying them away they always produce gold and shine brightly at night they protect against hunger, and thirst, and fear, and he who wears them grows in size . U. came back to Saudāsa, who gave him a sign. When he had got the ear rings, U. once more came back to Saudāsa, and asked him about the meaning of the mystic words he had caused him to say to Madayantī, as a sign. Saudāsa, referring to his own terrible condition in consequence of his being cursed, said that he hoped that this gift to a brahman might save him. U. asked Saudāsa to give him such advice as is approved by the wise is it proper for me to come back to thee or not Saudāsa said that he would then tell him never to come back. When U on his way to Ahalyā, having bound the ear rings in the folds of his black deerskin, had proceeded for some distance he became afflicted with hunger and climbed a bilva tree, hanging his deerskin on a branch, while he plucked some fruits. Struck by some fruits the deerskin fell n, the knot was untied, and a serpent of Airāvatas race carried the ear rings, holding them in his mouth, into an anthill. Filled with wrath, U. with his staff, pierced that anthill for thirty five days, desirous of making a path to the nether regions the goddess Earth became anxious Indra came there in the disguise of a brahman afflicted with the sorrow of U and told him that the regions of the Nāgas are thousands of yojanas distant as U. did not desist, Indra united the latters staff with his thunderbolt, and struck with the thunderbolt, the earth opened a way to the Nāgaloka . U. entered the Nāgaloka, very cheerless then there appeared to him a black steed with a white tail, whose face and eyes were of coppery hue. He told U. to blow into his anus, which thou often didst at the retreat of Gautama in former days the horse turned out to be Agni U. did as he was directed, a thick smoke enveloped the Nāgaloka, the Nāgas, headed by Vāsuki, gave U. the ear rings, which he brought to Ahalyā, . Bhārgava, Bhṛgūdvaha, Bhṛgukulodvaha, Bhṛgunandana.
Uttara1, son of Virāṭa . Bhūmiñjaya, Kaikeyīnandivardhana, Matsya, Mātsya, Matsyaputra, Matsyavīra, Pṛthiviñjaya, Vairāṭi, Virāṭaputra.
Uttara2, a prince .
Uttara3 = Viṣṇu .
Uttara4, .
Uttarā, daughter of Virāṭa, wife of Abhimanyu, mother of Parikṣit . Vairāṭī, Virāṭaduhitṛ, Virāṭatanayā, Abhimanyor bhāryā .
uttarā, sc. diś, .
Uttarāgni, name of a fire .
Uttarā Aṣāḍhāḥ, v. Aṣāḍhā.
Uttarāḥ Kuravaḥ, a people . g To the south of Nīla and to the north of Meru are U.K where the Siddhas reside, there the trees are always covered with sweet fruits and flowers, some of them yield fruits according to the will some of them are called kṣīrins and yield milk and six different rasas like amṛta, and clothes and ornaments the entire land has fine golden sands a portion of it is ruby, etc all the seasons are agreeable and nowhere s the land become miry. The men born there have fallen from the Devaloka, and are all of pure birth and handsome they are born twins, and the women are like Aps. in beauty they are free from illness and cheerful, they live, years. The birds named Bhāruṇḍāḥ take them up when dead and throw them into mountain caves, . i, . c, . g Gautama said There where the U.K. blaze in beauty rejoicing with the gods, where dwell the people sprung from Agni, water, and mountains, where Śakra rains all wishes, where women live in perfect free, where there is no jealousy among women and men, etc. Dhṛtarāṣṭra said This region is for those who are freed from all desire, who abstain from meat, who never take up the rod of chastisement, and never inflict harm on mobile or immobile creatures, who regard themselves as identical with all creatures, who have no wishes and are indifferent, and freed from affections regarding gain and loss, and to whom blame and praise are equal, . e, .
Uttarāḥ Phalgunyaḥ, v. Phalgunī.
Uttarāḥ Proṣṭhapadāḥ, v. Proṣṭhapadā.
Uttarajyotiṣa, a city .
Uttaramānasa, a sacred lake. b, . z, .
Uttaraṇa = Śiva
Uttāraṇa1 = Viṣṇu . Do. = Śiva, .
Uttarāpatha1 . Do pl. .
Uttara Yayātyupākhyāna, v. Yayāti .
Uttejanī, a mātṛ. u, .
Utthānaḥ sarvakarmaṇāṃ = Śiva .
Utthita = Śiva .
Utūla, pl a people .
Vāc1 = Sarasvatī, . Do. = Śiva .
Vācaspati1 . b, . Do. = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vācaspatya = Śiva .
Vācāviruddhāḥ, a class of gods .
Vācikā, adj. . b
Vaśa, pl a people .
Vaśakara = Śiva .
Vaśātala, pl a people .
Vaśāti, Vaśātika, Vaśātīya, v. Vas.
Vaśavartin = Mahāpuruṣa .
Vaśīkara = Śiva .
Vaśiṣṭha, Vāśiṣṭha, Vaśiṣṭhāpavāha, v. Vas, Vās.
Vaśya = Śiva .
Vādānya, a ṛṣi. b, .
Vaḍavā, the mother of the horses .
Vadavā, name of a tirtha. In . one should in the evening offer caru to the Fire this is equal to hundred thousands of kine, hundred rājasūyas, and a thousand horse sacrifices here a gift to the Pitṛs becomes inexhaustible. Here the ṛṣis, the Pitṛs, the gods, the Gandharvas, the Apsarases, the Guhyakas, the Kinnaras, the Yakṣas, the Siddhas, the Vidyādharas, men, the Rākṣasas, the Daityas, the Rudras, and Brahmán himself practised austerities for, years in order to gratify Viṣṇu, then they cooked caru and praised Keśava each with seven ṛces. Keśava conferred eightfold aiśvarya, etc on them, and then dis appeared, therefore that tīrtha became known by the name of Saptacaru, .
Vaḍavā, a river .
Vaḍavāgni = Vaḍavāmukha1 .
Vaḍavāmukha1, name of the submarine fire at Vaḍavā mukha. b, . b, . Vaḍavāvaktra. Do. = Śiva .
Vaḍavāmukha3, a ṛṣi. b, maharṣiḥ, incarnation of Nārāyaṇa, cursed the ocean, saying that its water should only be drinkable for the vaḍavāmukha
Vaḍavāmukha . b, sañjñitena, drinks the water of the oceanĀnuśāsanik.Śivathe face of Śivaṃ
Vaḍavāvaktra, a fire = Vāḍavāmukha1 .
Vaḍavāvaktra = Vaḍavāmukha. c, .
Vāddhika error in C. for Bālhīka .
Vadha = Śiva .
Vadhna, pl. v. Vadhra, pl.
Vadhra, pl a people .
Vadhryaśva, an ancient king .
Vadhūsarā, a river .
Vadhyā = Brahmavadhyā, .
Vāduli, see Vāhuli.
Vāgātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vāgindra, a brahman. b, .
Vāgmiṇ, a prince . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vāheyika, Vahi, Vāhīka, v. Bāheyika, etc.
Vāhīkapuṅgava, so B. for Bālhīka .
Vāhinī, wife of Kuru .
Vāhinī, a river .
Vahitṛ sarvabhūtānāṃ = Śiva .
Vahni1 = Agni, q.v.
Vahni2, an ancient king . b, .
Vahni3, = Viṣṇu .
Vahnidaivata, adj. .
Vahniloka, .
Vahninandana = Skanda, .
Vāhuli, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Vāhyālaya, abode of out castes, i.e. the country of the Vāhīkas, .
Vaicitravīrya = Dhṛtarāṣṭra1, q.v.
Vaicitravīryaka, adj. .
Vaicitravīryin = Dhṛtarāṣṭra5, .
Vaiśākha, name of a month .
Vaiśākhī, the day of full moon in the month of Vaiśākha .
Vaiśālākṣa, adj. .
Vaiśāleya, pl a family of serpents ʹ, .
Vaiśālī = Bhadrā, .
Vaiśampāyana, a ṛṣi, disciple of Vyāsa recited the Mhbhr. at the snake sacrifice of Janamejaya, or, . Brahmarṣi, Vyāsaśiṣya.
Vaiśeṣika, adj .
Vaiśravaṇa1 = Kubera, q.v. Do. = Śiva .
Vaiśravaṇa, adj. .
Vaiśravaṇa sabhā varṇana . The sabhā of Vaiśravaṇa is yojanas in length and in breadth, acquired by Vaiśravaṇa by his ascetic power it is supported by Guhyakas attached to the firmament, and capable of moving along it. There sits Vaiśravaṇa with thousands of wives, amidst the fragrance of the lotuses of the nalinī Alakā and the Nandana gardens, and the gods, Gandharvas, Apsarases, Yakṣas, Lakṣmī, Nalakūbara, myself, many devarṣis and brahmarṣis, kravyādas, Umāpati, with hosts of spirits, and Devī, and Gandharva chiefs, and Cakradharman, the chief of the Vidyādharas, Bhagadatta, and innumerable other kings, and Druma, the chief of the Kimpuruṣas, and the Rākṣasa king Mahendra Gandhamādana, and Vibhīṣaṇa, and the mountains Himavat, etc in their personified forms, and Nandīśvara and Mahākāla, and many pāriṣadas with arrowy ears and mouths, Kāṣṭha, Kuṭīmukha, Dantin, and Vijayā, and the roaring white bull, and Piśācas. Paulastya always aes Śiva, and sometimes is honoured by his visit. There also the best of jewels, Śaṅkha and Padma, those princes of all gems, accompanied by all the jewels of the earth, worship Kubera .
Vaiśvadeva, adj. . b, . g, . Do subst. neutr name of a certain offering .
Vaiśvāmitra = Aṣṭaka, .
Vaiśvānara1 = Agni, q.v.
Vaiśvānara2, a muni .
Vaiśvānara, pl a class of ṛṣis .
Vaiśvānaramukha = Śiva, .
Vaiśvānarī, adj. f. said of the Earth .
Vaiśyāḥ = Śiva .
Vaiśyāputra = Yuyutau, q.v.
Vaidambha = Śiva .
Vaidarbha, the father of Lopāmudrā .
Vaidarbhi, the father of Lopāmudrā .
Vaidarbhī = Suśravā, .
Vaidarbhī = Maryādā, .
Vaidarbhī = Damayantī, .
Vaidarbhī = Lopāmudrā, .
Vaidarbhī, wife of Sagara .
Vaideha1, a prince contemporary with Yudhiṣṭhira .
Vaideha2 = Janaka, .
Vaideha3 = Nimi, .
Vaideha4, pl a people = Videha, pl .
Vaideha5, name of a mixed caste, .
Vaidehaka, name of a mixed caste = Vaideha, .
Vaidehaka, adj. .
Vaidehī = Maryādā, .
Vaidehī, the wife of Śatānīka2 .
Vaidehī = Sītā, .
Vaidika, adj .
Vaidūryaśikhara, a mountain next.
Vaidūryaparvata, a mountain .
vaidya1, adj . Do mostly pl . Do name of a caste, .
Vaidya4 . v. Raibhya.
Vaidya5 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vaihāra, a mountain near Girivraja .
Vaihāyasa1, pl a class of ṛṣis. b, .
Vaihāyasa2, name of a lake .
Vaijayanta1, the standard of Indra .
Vaijayanta2, a mountain. d, .
vaijayantī adj said of garlands, .
Vaijayantī, dual, name of the bells of Airāvata .
Vaikartaṇa = Karṇa, q.v.
Vaikhāna = Viṣṇu .
Vaikhānasa1, pl a class of ṛṣis . u, . b, learnt the religion of Nārāyaṇa from the phenapāḥ and communicated it to SomaSuvarṇotpattiarose from the ashes of the sacrificial fireĀnuśāsanik.ānāṃ vacanam ṛṣīṇāṃ, a sentence of theirs quoted
Vaikhānasa2 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Vaikhānasa3, adj. . l, .
Vaikuṇṭha = Viṣṇu, .
Vaimānika1, name of a tīrtha. k By bathing in . and Kiṅkiṇīkāśrama one acquires the merit of repairing everywhere at will. The merit of bathing in Kālikāśrama, etc .
vaimānika2, adj .
Vainateya1 = Garuḍa, .
Vainateya2, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Vainateya2, pl. ʹ, .
Vaiṇavin = Śiva .
Vainya = Pṛthu, .
Vaiṇya, v. Vainya.
Vainyopākhyāna .
Vairāja1, pl a class of pitṛs .
Vairāja3, adj. . d, .
Vairāma, pl a people .
Vairāṭa, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Vairāṭa, adj. .
Vairāṭi1 = Śaṅkha, .
Vairāṭi2 = Śveta8, .
Vairāṭi3 = Uttara, .
Vairāṭi4, v. Vairāṭī.
Vairāṭī = Uttarā, .
Vairocana = Bali, .
Vairocani = Bali, .
Vaiṣṇava, adj. . d, . f, . c, . u, . f, . b, . b, aśvamedhaṃ yajñaṃĀnuśāsanik.ī, said of wealth given instead of kinecandralokāḥī, sc. the earthtejaḥUttaṅkavapuḥrūpaṃMahābhārataa worshipper of Viṣṇupadaṃ, yaśaḥpadaṃ
Vaiṣṇavāstra . c Kṛṣna has four forms
Vaitahavya, pl. . b, .
vaitālika, pl .
Vaitālin, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Vaitaraṇī, one or more rivers, also the river in the region of Yama. b, . b On the . Dharma performed sacrifices, placing himself under the protection of the gods on the northern bank ṛṣis formerly and now performed sacrifices it is equal to the path of the gods to a man who has attained to Svarga. There Rudra seized the sacrificial beast as his share, but having been satisfied by sacrifice he gave up the beast and went by the path of the gods . From fear of Rudra the gods reserved the best of all shares for him. He, who reciting this gāthā performs his ablutions there, sees with his eyes the path of the gods, .
Vaitrakīyavana, see Vetrakīyavana.
Vaittapālya, adj. . b, .
Vaivāhika, adj. .
. . Dhṛṣṭadyumna related what had happened from their conversation on military subjects, he concluded that they were the Pāṇḍavas, of whom it had been heard that they had all escaped from the lac house. Drupada sent his purohita to Yudhiṣṭhira, who said that there was no occasion for Drupada to grieve for his daughter. While Yudhiṣṭhira was saying this, another messenger from Drupada announced that the feast was ready . The Pāṇḍavas, with Kuntī and Kṛṣṇā were conveyed to Drupadas palace. Drupada wished to ascertain to which caste they belonged, and had for that purpose made ready a large collection of various articles appertaining to different human occupations after dinner they began to observe, with interest, the imple ments of war, wherefore Drupada and his son thought that they were of royal blood . Yudhiṣṭhira told Drupada who they were. Drupada vowed to restore Yudhi ṣṭhira to his king. Yudhiṣṭhira told him that they would all marry Kṛṣṇā, which Drupada considered to be contrary to morality. While they discoursed on this matter Vyāsa arrived . Drupada consulted Vyāsa about the wedding of his daughter. Vyāsa desired to hear the opinion of each of them. Drupada regarded the practice of marrying one wife to five men as sinful, and so did Dhṛṣṭadyumna. Yudhiṣṭhira thought it not to be sinful, because his heart, that never inclined to what was sinful, approved of it it is recorded in the Purāṇa that Jaṭilā Gautamī had married seven ṛṣis, and a munis daughter, born of a tree married the ten Pracetases moreover, their mother Kuntī had told them to enjoy her all. Kuntī was afraid that she would be guilty of a lie. Vyāsa said that Yudhiṣṭhira was right, and took Drupada apart and related to him Pañcendropākhyāna . . Drupada then consented, as it had been ordained by the gods. Vyāsa declared that very day to be auspicious as the moon entered in conjunction with Puṣya . Drupada and his son made preparations for the wedding, and Dhaumya, performing the usual rites, married Kṛṣṇā to Yudhiṣṭhira, and then to his brothers on successive days. Draupadī regained her virginity every day after her previous marriage. Then Drupada gave to them various kinds of excellent wealth . Drupada, after his alliance with the Pāṇḍavas, had all his fears dispelled. His ladies worshipped the feet of Kunitī. Kuntī pronounced a blessing upon Kṛṣṇā. Kṛṣṇa sent them costly presents .
. . On the third day the five Pāṇḍavas, attired in white robes after a bath, etc entered the palace of Virāṭa and took their seats on the thrones reserved for kings. Virāṭa rebuked Kaṅka for this insolence Arjuna praised Yudhiṣṭhira, saying that there was none like him, even amongst As men, Rā G Y Ku or M. U and disclosed that he was Yudhiṣṭhira . Asked by Virāṭa which of them then was Arjuna, etc Arjuna pointed out Bhīma, Nakula, and Sahadeva, Draupadī, and himself. Uttara spoke of Arjunas prowess, and described each of them, especially Arjuna . Virāṭa, thinking he had offended Yudhiṣṭhira, offered to bestow his daughter Uttarā on Arjuna, which was applauded by Uttara, and offered his whole king, etc to Yudhiṣṭhira. Arjuna accepted Uttarā as his daughter in law, saying that such an alliance between the Matsyas and the Bharatas was desirable . Asked by Virāṭa why he himself did not wish to accept his daughter as wife, Arjuna alleged that she had confided in him as her father, and people might entertain suspicions against her or him by accepting her for Abhimanyu he attested her purity. Virāṭa approved of it, and Yudhiṣṭhira gave his assent the latter sent invitations to Kṛṣṇa, etc and so did Virāṭa. The Pāṇḍavas took up their abode at Upaplavya. Arjuna brought over Abhimanyu and Kṛṣṇa, and many Daśārhas from the Ānartta country. The Kāśi king and Śaibya came, each accom panied by an akṣauhiṇī of troops Yajñasena came there with the sons of Draupadī and Śikhaṇḍin, and Dhṛṣṭadyumna came with an akṣauhiṇī. All the kings that came there were lords of akṣauhiṇīs and performers of sacrifices, etc. Then came Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, etc with Abhimanyu and his mother. And Indrasena, etc having lived at Dvārakā for a whole year, came with the chariots of the Pāṇḍavas. In the train of Kṛṣṇa came also, elephants, thousands of horses, millions of chariots, milliards of foot soldiers, and innumerable Vṛṣṇi, Andhaka, and Bhoja warriors. Kṛṣṇa gave to each of the Pāṇḍavas numerous female slaves, etc. Then the nuptial festival set in . The matrons of the Matsyas were headed by Sudeṣṇā but Kṛṣṇā was the foremost in beauty, etc. Virāṭa gave, horses and elephants, and much wealth, and offered his king, etc to the Pāṇḍavas. Yudhiṣṭhira gave all the wealth that had been brought by Kṛṣṇa, etc to the brahmans .
Vaivasvata1, .
Vaivasvata2 = Manu7, .
Vaivasvata3 = Yama, .
Vaivasvata4, adj. abelonging to VivasvatBhīṣmavadhap.Savitur ṃ, sc. astṛaṃPutradarśanap.lokaṃi.e. Manu
Vaivasvatasya tīrtha, name of a tīrtha. q, .
Vaivasvatī = Tapatī, .
Vaivasvatī = Śraddhā, .
. . Requested by Yudhiṣṭhira, Mārkaṇḍeya said The maharṣi Manu, Vivasvats son, equal to Prajāpati, excelled his father and grand father in strength, etc. He practised austerities in Badarī, standing on one foot, etc for, years. Once a small fish came to him on the banks of the Cīriṇī and asked his protection from the greater fishes. He first reared it in a water vessel, and as it grew larger, he carried it to a large tank, and thence into the Gaṅgā, and at last into the ocean. The fish, saying that the world was about to be destroyed, caused him to build a strong ship with a long rope and ascend it with the seven ṛṣis and the seeds that were enumerated by the brahmans of old. The fish then appeared and was recognized by a horn, to which Manu tied the noose. And, while there was water everywhere, the fish dragged the boat through the flood for many years, until, advised by the fish, Manu tied the ship to the highest peak of Himavat, thence called Naubandhana. The fish told him that he was Brahmán, and caused Manu to create by austerities all creatures with gods, Asuras, and men. This is the Mātsyakaṃ Purāṇaṃ .
Vaiyāghrapāda = Upamanyu, .
Vaiyāghrapadya = Kaṅka, .
Vaiyamaka, pl a people .
Vaiyāsaki = Śuka, .
vājapeya, name of a certain kind of soma sacrifice, .
Vājasana1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vājasani = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vājigrīva = Hayagrīva3, .
vājin, pl. .
Vajra1, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Vajra2, a Yādava prince .
Vajra3, the thunderbolt of Indra . d When the thunderbolt of Indra was hurled at Vṛtras head it broke into, pieces that which is known in the world as glory, is a portion of the thunderbolt, therefore the horses of the kṣatriyas chariot ought not to be slain, . b, . b, made by Dhātṛ from the bones of Dadhīca names1
vajra, name of a vyūha . vajrākhya.
Vajrabāhu, a monkey .
Vajrabhṛt = Indra, q.v.
Vajraśīrṣa, a son of Bhṛgu. b, .
Vajradatta, king of Prāgjyotiṣa, the son of Bhagadatta . Bhagadattaja, Bhagadattasuta, Bhagadattātmaja, Prāgjyotiṣādhipa.
Vajradhara = Indra, q.v.
Vajradharātmaja = Arjuna, .
Vajradhārin, Vajradhṛk = Indra, q.v.
Vajrahasta1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Śiva .
Vajrahastātmajātmaja = Abhimanyu, .
vajrākhya, name of a vyūha, .
Vajranābha, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
vajranābha, adj said of the discus of Kṛṣṇa, .
Vajraniṣkambha, v. Vajraviṣkambha.
Vajrapāṇi = Indra, q.v. Add, .
Vajrasaṅghāta = Śiva .
Vajravega, a Rākṣasa, brother of Dūṣaṇa and Pramāthin . Dūṣaṇānuja, Dūṣaṇāvaraja, Rakṣas.
Vajraviṣkambha, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Vajrāyudha = Indra, q.v.
Vajrin1 = Indra, q.v. Do. = Śiva, .
Vajrin3, a Viśvadeva .
vāka, pl .
Vakanaka v. Bakanakha.
Vākpati = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vakra, one or more princes . Dantavakra, Karūṣādhipati .
Vakradanta, .
Vakrātapa, pl a people .
Vakṣogrīva, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Vālakhilya, pl certain pigmy ṛṣis . Śaunaka asked some questions on the omens foreboding fear . Sauti related Once when Kaśyapa was sacrificing from desire of offspring, assisted by the ṛṣis, gods, and Gandharvas, Indra, who had been appointed to bring the sacrificial fuel together with the . and the other deities insulted the whose bodies were of the size of a thumb, all together carrying one single stalk of a palāśa leaf, and much afflicted when sunk in the water collected in the footstep of a cow. The . then sacrificed to effect that there should be another Indra. Indra repaired to Kaśyapa he reminded them that Brahmán himself had made Indra the lord of the three worlds the . then declared that their effort had also been meant for the son wished for by him. Meanwhile Aruṇa and Garuḍa were begotten and destined by Kaśyapa to become the brothers and helpmates of Indra, . b, . b, . h, . u, . f, . b, ṛṣīnĀnuśāsanik.disregarded by Indra, the . gratified Śiva, who granted them that they should create a bird that would rob the amṛta from Indra, Upamanyunadīṃ...air niṣevitāṃSuvarṇotpattitheir originŚapathavidhiĀnuśā sanik.Umā Maheśvarasaṃv.gaṇe, B. gaṇaiḥsūryamaṇḍaledescriptionĀnuśāsanik.
Vālakhilya = Mahāpuruṣa .
Valgujaṅgha, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Vāliśikha, a serpent .
Vālikhilya, v. Vālakhilya.
Vālin1, an Asura .
Vālin2, a monkey king, brother of Sugrīva . b, . Śakraputra.
Vāliputra = Aṅgada, .
Vālisuta = Aṅgada, .
Valkala, pl a people .
Valkalājinadhārin, Valkalājinavāsas = Śiva .
Vallabha, an ancient king. b, .
Vallabha, pl a people .
Vallyaḥ = Śiva .
Vālmīka, a ṛṣi . next.
Vālmīki, a ṛṣi . Bhārgava .
Vālmīki2, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Vāma1, b, .
Vāma2, a ṛṣi .
Vāma3 = Śiva .
Vāmā, a matṛ. u, .
Vāmadeva1, a ṛṣi .
Vāmadeva2, a prince .
Vāmadeva3 = Śiva .
. . As Yudhiṣṭhira wished to hear about the greatness of brahmans, Mārkaṇḍeya related King Parikṣit, in Ayodhyā, of the race of Ikṣvāku, was, in the forest, led far away by a deer, and by a tank met with a beautiful maiden, who came along singing. He married her after having given her the pledge not to let her see water, and having arrived at his capital he lived with her in privacy, and nobody could obtain any interview with him. His chief minister, having found out the matter, made an artificial forest, with a tank covered with a net of pearls, and showed it to the king. The king told his wife to plunge into this tank. She did so, and did not reappear. When the water had been baled out a frog was found. The king ordered all frogs to be slaughtered. Āyu, the king of the frogs, in the shape of an ascetic, told him that the queen was his daughter Suśobhanā, who had deceived many kings. She was restored to the king, but Āyu cursed her, saying Thy offspring shall prove disrespectful to brahmans. Parikṣit begot three sons on her Śala, Dala, and Bala. Having installed Śala on the throne, Parikṣit retired to the wood. One Śala, as he could not overtake a deer, forced his charioteer to indicate to him, to whom the Vāmya horses be longed. He borrowed them from the ṛṣi Vāmadeva and caught the deer, but did not return them. After a month, Vāmadeva in vain sent his disciple Ātreya, and then came himself, and asked for the steeds. The king, saying that such horses were not fit for brahmans, in vain offered to give him two bulls, then four asses or four mules, and as he threatened to let him be killed, Vāmadeva, saying that brahmans could not be punished, let four Rākṣasas slay him with their lances. Dala, whom the Ikṣvākus installed on the throne, attempted to shoot Vāmadeva with a poisoned arrow, but shot his own son Śyenajit, and was unable to discharge another poisoned arrow. Then he gave way, and, advised by Vāmadeva, he touched his queen with the arrow and was thus purified of his sin. The queen obtained the boon from Vāmadeva, that she might prevail upon her husband that they both should serve the brahmans, and he be freed from his sin, and that Vāmadeva should think of their weal. The king became glad and restored the Vāmya horses .
Vāmadeva upākhyāna .
Vāmaka, name of a caste, .
Vāmana1, a serpent .
Vāmana2, name of a tīrtha .
Vāmana3, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Vāmana4, name of one of the elephants of the quarters . c, .
Vāmana5, a mountain in Kranñcadvīpa . Vāmanaka2.
Vāmana6 = Viṣṇu, .
Vāmana7 = Śiva, .
Vāmana8, adj .
Vāmana, pl a people .
Vāmanaka1, a tīrtha .
Vāmanaka2 = Vāmana5, .
Vāmanikā, a mātṛ. u, .
Vaṃśa = Śiva .
Vaṃśā, one of the daughters of Prādhā .
Vaṃśagulma, a tīrtha .
Vaṃśakara = Śiva .
Vaṃśamūlaka, a tīrtha .
Vaṃśanāda = Śiva .
Vaṃśavardhana = Viṣṇu .
Vāmya, dual, the horses of Vāmadeva .
Vanamālin1 = Balarāma, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
vānara, pl. .
Vānaradhvaja, Vānaraketana, Vānaraketu = Arjuna, q.v. .
Vānarapravaradhvaja = Arjuna, .
Vānararṣabhalakṣaṇa = Arjuna, .
Vānaravaryaketana = Arjuna, .
Vanaspati = Mahāpuruṣa .
Vanaspatīnāṃ patiḥ = Śiva, .
Vānava, pl a people .
Vanavāsaka, pl a people .
Vanāyu1, an Asura .
Vanāyu2, a prince .
Vanāyu3, pl a people .
Vanāyuja . adj. said of horses .
Vandanā, name of a river .
Vandi or Vandin, a sūta, son of Varuṇa . Sauti.
vandin, pl .
Vāneya, pl a class of munis, .
Vaneyu, a prince .
Vaṅga1, a prince . .
Vaṅga2, a Vaṅga king of the past . the prec.
Vaṅga3, the Vaṅga king at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira .
Vaṅga4, the country of the Vaṅgas .
Vaṅga, pl a people . g, .
Vaṅgādhipa .
Vaṅgarāja .
Vāṇī, a river .
Vāṇī = Sarasvatī, .
Vaṇija = Śiva .
Vaṅkṣu, a river, probably the Oxus .
Vapu, an Apsaras .
Vapus = Śiva .
Vapuṣmatī, a mātṛ. u, .
Vapuṣṭamā, the wife of Janamejaya Pārikṣita .
Vara = Śiva, .
Varā, a river .
Varada1, adj. said of various gods = Śiva, = Indra, = Sūrya, = Viṣṇu . Do. fem said of a goddess = Durgā, .
Varada2, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Varadā, a river .
Varadāna, a tīrtha .
Varadhāna, error in C. for Vaṭadhāna.
Varāha1, a muni .
Varāha2, a mountain .
Varāha3, an Asura .
Varāha4 = Vīṣṇu, . Do. = Śiva .
Vārāha1 v. Varāha4.
Vārāha2, name of one or more tīrthas .
vārāha, adj . Do said of mātṛs, .
Vārāhāśva, v. Varāha3.
Varāhadhvaja = Jayad ratha
Varāhaka, a serpent .
Varāhakarṇa, a Yakṣa .
Vārāhaparvata, a mountain. b, .
Varāhāvatāra . bis . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira Lomaśa related In the Kṛta yuga, when the primeval deity assumed the function of Yama, the creatures did not die, and multiplied to such a degree that the Earth sank yojanas. She applied to Nārāyaṇa, who, in the shape of a boar with a single tusk, lifted her up by means of that. The gods, with the ṛṣis, became afraid of the agitation produced, but learnt the matter from Brahmán, and with him they went to Nandana, there Viṣṇu was sitting in the shape of a boar with Śrīvatsa on his breast, together with Suparṇa, and having seen him they returned home .
Varajānuka, a muni .
Varamālyagandhavastra = Śiva .
Vāraṇa, name of a country.
Vāraṇāhvaya, adj. or subst. = Hāstinapura, .
Vāraṇasāhvaya, adj. or subst. = Hāsti napura, .
Varāṇasī, a river .
Vārāṇasī, a city in the country of the Kāśis, the present Benares . c, . g, . b, . b, . b, . b, . Kāśinagara, Kāśipura, Kāśipurī.
Vāraṇāvata, a city . f, ʹ, .
Vāraṇāvataka, adj. .
Varāṅga = Viṣṇu .
Varāṅgī, a princess, daughter of Dṛṣadvat and wife of Saṃyāti .
Vārapāśyāpavāha, pl names of peoples .
Varaprada = Mahāpuruṣa .
Varāroha = Viṣṇu .
Varātivaradā = Śiva .
Vāravāsyāyavāha, pl v. Vārapāśyāpavāha.
Varavarṇinī = Durgā, .
Vāravatyā, a river .
Varayu, a king .
Varcas1, son of Soma.
Varcas2 = Suvarcas, .
Varcas3, son of Sucetas. b, .
Varcasvin1, son of Varcas1 . . Do. = Śiva .
Vārddhakṣatri = Jayadratha, q.v.
Vārddhakṣemi, a Vṛṣṇi prince . Vārṣṇeya.
Vardhakin = Śiva .
Vardhamānadvāra, name of a gate in Hāstinapura .
Vardhamānapuradvāra =, .
Vardhana1, a companion of Skanda. u, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu
Vareṇya1 = Śiva . Do according to BR name of the sixth son of Bhṛgu. b, . Vibhu.
Vargā, an Apsaras .
Varin, a Viśvadeva .
Vāripa Varuṇa, .
Vāriṣeṇa, an ancient king .
Variṣṭha1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Variṣṭha2, son of Manu Cākṣuṣa .
Varītākṣa, an Asura. b, .
Vārkṣī, a daughter of a muni .
Varmaka, pl a people . Varṇāśramāṇāṃ vidhivat pṛthak karmani vartī = Śiva .
Varṇadhara = Mahāpuruṣa .
Varṇakara = Śiva .
Varṇātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Varṇavarāḥ = Śiva .
Varṇavibhāvin = Śiva .
Vārṣagaṇya, a ṛṣi .
Vārṣaparvaṇī = Śarmiṣṭhā, q.v.
Vārṣṇeya1, the charioteer of Nala, afterwards of Ṛtuparṇa .
Vārṣṇeya2 = Abhimanyu, .
Vārṣṇeya3 = Balarāma, .
Vārṣṇeya4 Cekitāna, .
Vārṣṇeya5 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vārṣṇeya6 = Sātyaki, .
Vārṣṇeya7 = Vārddhakṣemi, .
Vārṣṇeya8, dual = Kṛtavarman and Sātyaki, .
Vārṣṇeya9, adj. .
Vārṣṇeya1, pl a people = Vṛṣṇi, pl .
Vārṣṇeyī = Kuntī, .
Vārṣṇeyī = Subhadrā, .
Vārtta, an ancient king .
Varuṇa, a god, one of the Ādityas as Lord of the waters one of the Lokapālas, armed with nooses . b, . b, . c, . b, . c, d, atra i.e. in the west pītvā samastān vai sya rasān ṣaṭ jāyate taruṇaḥ Somaḥ śuklasyādauālayehusband of Gaurī, reme...ś ca yathā Gauryāṃsyālayaṃ . gave, horses to Ṛcīka, and bBhagavadyānap.Dharma bound the Daityas and Dānavas and handed them over to who keeps them in the depths of the oceanrājā, had been vanquished by KṛṣṇaSainyaniryāṇap.Ulūkadūtāgamanap.sāgaro ālayaḥBhagavadgītāp.o yādasām ahaṃ, sc. asmi, says KṛṣṇaKṛṣṇa identified with .Bhīṣmavadhap.aḥ pāśabhṛd vāpi, sc. śakyo jetuṃajeyaṃ... ena, sc. Ghaṭotkacaaḥ pāśadhṛg vāpi, sc. śakyo jetuṃśakyo...jetuṃsadṛśaḥ...syaDroṇābhiṣekap.Yama Vaiśravaṇāditya Mahendra opamaṃ, sc. Uttamaujasaṃyāhir abhisaṃvṛtaṃ, had been vanquished by Kṛṣṇa in the seaPratijñāp.Arjuna had obtained weapons from etc.Jayadrathavadhap.aḥ pāśavān ivaŚrutāyudhasyātmajaḥ, i.e. Śrutāyudha. had, with the river Parṇāśā, the son Śrutāyudha, whom he gave a mace and instructed its natureJayadrathavadhap.yathoktaṃ eṇa, all. to bBrahmeśānendra ān avahad purā rathaḥ, sc. the chariot of ArjunaGhaṭotkaca vadhap.ātmajopamāḥJaleśvaraḥ...notsahet KarṇaṃNārāyaṇāstra mokṣap.Śiva identified with . Karṇap.Yama Kubera Vāsavāḥād vāpi pāśinaḥpratīcīṃ ḥ pāti pālayānaḥ surān balīArjunaBrahmeśānendra ān kramaśo yo vahat purā, sc. rathaḥ, i.e. the chariot of ArjunaKarṇap.ṃ ko mbhasā hanyātsided with ArjunaSkandayathā...ṃ Jaleśvaraṃ...abhyasiñcat...Brahmāgave two companions to Skandagave a nāga to SkandaBaladevatīrthayātrāApāṃ patiḥ, anointed in the tīrtha Taijasa, vin a former kalpaat the tīrtha Taijasasāgarālayaṃyādasāṃ patiṃYamunātīrthaputro diteḥper formed a rājasūya in YamunātīrthaAsita DevalaMitrā yor lokānBaladevatīrtha yātrāMitrā yoḥ...āśramaṃGadāyuddhap.sadṛśakarmāṇau sya, sc. Bhīmasena and DuryodhanaRājadh.Arjuna had obtained weapons from etc.among the gods, etc who are slaughterersṢoḍaśarāj cf v. Maruttasa āḥ...devāḥ, came to the sacrifice of MaruttaRājadh.the sheep identified with .apāṃ rājye surānāñ ca vidadhe ṃ, sc. ViṣṇuPavana śālmalīsaṃv.JaleśvaraḥMokṣadh.yādasām asṛjan nāthaṃ ñ ca Jaleśvaraṃ, sc. Kṛṣṇathe fifth of the Ādityas Mitrā yoḥ putraḥ...AgastyaḥBali Vāsava saṃv.Bali identified with .Tulādhāra Jājalisaṃv.the sheep identified with .Mokṣadh.identified with the supreme LordDakṣayajña vināśaālayaḥ, i.e. the oceanMokṣadh.Siddhiñ ca devīṃ sya patnīṃonly B C. has by error VāViśvāmitrop.devam Ādityam ambhasāṃ patiṃĀdityaḥ, gave, horses to Ṛcīka, and Ānuśāsanik.Śiva identified with .endū, identified with ŚivagopaḥAṣṭāvakra Diksaṃv.Ānuśā sanik.aiśvarye o rājāthe sheep identified with .Suvarṇotpattiidentified with ŚivaŚiva assumed the form of . and performed a sacrificeMahādevaḥ, = Īśvaraḥ, yādasāṃ patiḥĪśvaraḥ, at the sacrifice arose Bhṛgu, etc who were reckoned as the offspring of .Tārakavadhop.made presents to SkandaĀnuśāsanik.Chattropānahotpattigāmbhīryaṃ syaĀnuśāsanik.to . offerings should be made in the west pratīcyāṃVaruṇalokasya rājñaḥ sadaneUmā Maheśvarasaṃv.sya tathā Gaurī, sc. sādhvīĀnuśāsanik.Jaleśvaraḥ, the fourth of the Ādityas Mitrā yoḥ putraḥ...Agastyaḥ syartvijaḥ sapta paścimāṃ diśam āsthitāḥ, i.e. Dṛḍheyu, etc.Utathya. robbed Bhadrā, the daughter of Soma and the wife of Utathya, but was forced to give her backŚivaidentified with ŚivaĀnuśā sanik.saha Gauryā Mitrā yoḥ putraḥ...AgastyaḥMuñjavatworships Śiva on MuñjavatGuruśiṣ yasaṃv.ambhasāṃ...rājāAnugītāp.Mitreṇa o yathā, sc. guptaḥMausalap.rājā, in the ocean, received the nāga who issued from BalarāmaMahāprasthānikap.the Gāṇḍiva had been owned by . and was given back to himSvargārohaṇap.sya lokānḥthe lord of the waterssahā Mitrābhyāṃ yathen draḥyathā MitrauSurāmbu preta vittānāṃ patīnin the comp. Pitṛvittāmbu deveśān, only C.Page7 b lord of the watersyāaṇavṛtaḥlord of aquatic animals
Varuṇa2, a Gandharva .
Varuṇa3, a serpent .
Varuṇa4 = Sūrya, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Varuṇā, a river .
Vāruṇa1, a tīrtha .
Vāruṇa2 = Bhṛgu, .
Vāruṇa3 = Viṣṇu .
Vāruṇa4, mostly pl. . b, .
Vāruṇa5, adj. . b, . d, . e, . b, . u, . b, . b, . g, . b, . b, . b, .
Varuṇaśrotasa, a mountain .
. .
. . The sabhā of Varuṇa has been built by Viśvakarman in the water it is of pure white, and in dimensions similar to those of Yamas. There Varuṇa is sitting with Vāruṇī worshipped by the Ādityas, Nāgas, Daityas, and Dānavas likewise the four oceans the rivers, lakes, etc in their corporeal forms the aquatic animals, troops of Gandharvas and Apsarases, and Sunābha, the minister of Varuṇa he is surrounded by his sons and grand sons, and Go, and Puṣkara .
Varuṇasrotasa, v. Varuṇaśrotasa.
Varuṇāstra . b, . Vāruṇa, adj.
Vāruṇi1, a Vainateya .
Vāruṇi2 = vasiṣṭha, .
Vāruṇi3 = Agastya, .
Vāruṇī, a goddess . Surā.
Vāruṇya, adj. .
Varūthinī, an Apsaras .
Vasā, a river .
Vasanta .
Vasāti1, son of the elder Janamejaya .
Vasāti or Vaśāti, pl a people .
Vasātika, pl. = Vasāti, pl .
Vasātīya .
Vasātīya, pl. = Vasāti, pl .
Vāsātya, pl. = Vasāti, pl .
Vāsava = Indra, q.v. . Do. = Śiva .
Vāsava, adj. .
Vāsava, adj. .
Vāsava, pl. .
Vāsavaguru = Bṛhaspati, .
Vāsavaja = Arjuna, .
Vāsavanandana = Arjuna, .
Vāsavānantaraja, Vāsavānuja, Vāsavāvaraja = Viṣṇu, v. Viṣṇu.
Vāsaveya = Vyāsa, .
Vāsavi = Arjuna, q.v. .
Vāsavī = Satvavutī, .
Vaṣaṭkāra1 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vasiṣṭha, a ṛṣi, son of Varuṇa, one of the Saptarṣis, husband of Arundhatī, father of Śakti and grandfather of Parāśara. . b, . i, . n, . p, . y, . g, . b, . b, . c, . b, Hairaṇya garbhāt, cursed Hiraṇyakaśipusya sutaḥ Śaktriḥmānasaṃ...Pitāmahasyakula nandanaḥ, i.e. VyāsaĀnuśāsanik.sya...hataṃ putraśataṃ, sc. by Viśvāmitrasalile purātmānaṃ majjayan, all. to sya saṃvādaṃ Brahmaṇaś ca, s also C.s also C discourse between . and BrahmánUpamanyus tvam ṛṣīṇāṃ, sc. asi, sc. ŚivaĀnuśāsanik.caturthas tvaṃ sya, sc. Vyāsaamong the ṛṣis who came to see Bhīṣmathe purohita of Saudāsainstructed Saudāsa about gifts of kinedevarṣiṃSuvarṇotpattirelated the SuvarṇotpattiTārakavadhop.related the Tāraka vadhopākhyānaĀnuśāsanik.Bisastainyop.s also C etymologyŚapathavidhiĀnuśā sanik.sapta...ṛṣayaḥ...pramukhāḥonly B.Rantideva made gifts to .avarṣati ca Parjanye sarvabhūtāni devarāṭ o jīvayām āsaKakṣasena made gifts to .Mitrasaha i.e. Kalmāṣapāda gave his wife Madayantī to . among the seven Dhaneśvarasya guravaḥ in the north Pavanārjunasaṃv.khalino bhavat, Kṛṣṇa Vāsudevaarose from the seed of the gods, which fell into a jar.Ānuśā sanik.among the ṛṣis of the northAśvamedhikap.restored Indra to senses with the Rathantara sāman, cf Brāhmaṇagītāsapta saptarṣayaḥ siddhā pramukhaiḥ saha, read pramukhās tathāGuru śiṣyasaṃv.Page7 b the husband of Arundhatīq.v.q.v.the son of Hiranyagarbha the son of Mitra and Varuṇathe son of Varuṇa
Vāsiṣṭha1 = Śakti, .
Vāsiṣṭha2, name of a tīrtha . Vāsiṣṭhī.
Vāsiṣṭha3, name of a fire .
Vāsiṣṭha4, pl. .
Vāsiṣṭha, adj. .
Vāsiṣṭha . . Arjuna wished to hear about Vasiṣṭha. The Gandharva said Vasiṣṭha is Brahmáns spiritual son and Arundhatīs husband Kāma and Krodha, who cannot be vanquished even by the immortals, used to shampoo his feet. Though his wrath was excited by Viśvāmitras offence, he did not yet exterminate the Kuśikas. Afflicted at the loss of his sons, he did not any dreadful deed for the destruction of Viśvāmitra. He did not transgress Kṛtānta in order to bring back his lost children from the abode of Yama. It was by obtaining him that the Ikṣvākus acquired this earth, and with him as their purohita, they performed many great sacrifices. Therefore acquire a fit purohita . Arjuna wished to hear of the hostility between Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha. The Gandharva said This old story of Vasiṣṭha they tell in all worlds. In Kānyakubja king Gādhi, son of Kuśika, had a son Viśvāmitra, who, with his ministers, used to go a hunting. Once he arrived at the hermitage of Vasiṣṭha, who offered him arghya, etc. from his cow Nandinī, who yielded everything desired Viśvāmitra asked Vasiṣṭha to give him Nandinī for an arbuda of kine or his king, but in vain. Then he wanted to take the cow by force. She repaired to Vasiṣṭha, who at first did nothing, saying, am a forgiving brahman but at last he said not aban you Stay if you can Hearing this word, the cow attacked Viśvāmitras troops from her tail she began to rain showers of burning coals from her tail she brought forth Pahlavas, from her udders Drāviḍas and Śakas, from her womb Yavanas, from her dung Śabaras, from her urine Kāñcis, and from her sides Śarabhas, and from the froth of her mouth Pauṇḍras, Kirātas, Yavanas, Siṃhalas, Barbaras, Vaśas, Civukas, Pulindas, Cīnas, Hūṇas, Keralas, and other Mlecchas, who attacked Viśvāmitras soldiers. Viśvāmitras troops fied, but none was deprived of life. Viśvāmitra then, disgusted with kṣatriya prowess, set his mind on asceticism, and finally became a brahman and drank soma with Indra . Kalmāṣapāda . Vasiṣṭha patiently bore his grief, and resolved rather to sacrifice his own life than exterminate the Kauśikas. He threw himself n from the summit of Meru, entered a huge fire in the forest, and tied a strong weight to his neck and threw himself into the sea, but all in vain, and, in distress of heart, he returned to his hermitage . Beholding it bereft of his children, he left it again and tied himself strongly with cords and flung himself into a mighty river, but the stream cut those cords and cast the ṛṣi ashore, whence that river was called Vipāśā. Once more he threw himself into a river flowing from Himavat, but the river immediately fled in different directions, and has since been known by the name of the Śatadru . He now again went towards his hermitage, and was on the way addressed by Adṛśyantī, the wife of Śaktri, who had for twelve years borne his child in her womb. Hearing that child in the womb reciting the Vedas with the six Aṅgas, Vasiṣṭha refrained from self destruction, and, accompanied by Adṛśyantī, returned to his hermitage. One day he saw Kalmāṣapāda, who would devour him Adṛśyantī was terrified, but Vasiṣṭha restrained him by uttering huṃ, and, sprinkling him with water sanctified by mantras, and freed him from his curse that had lasted twelve years. Kalmāṣapāda promised never more to insult brahmans, and prevailed upon Vasiṣṭha that he accompanied him to his capital Ayodhyā and begat a son for him on the queen. Then he went back to his hermitage. After twelve years the queen tore open her womb by a stone, and then was born the rājarṣi Aśmaka, who founded the city of Paudanya . Parāśara .
Vasiṣṭhāpavāha, name of a tīrtha . p A great enmity arose between Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha, due to their rivalry in respect of ascetic austerities. The hermitage of Vasiṣṭha was in Sthāṇutīrtha, on the bank of the Sarasvatī on the opposite bank was the hermitage of Viśvāmitra. There Sthāṇu had practised penances, and having performed a sacrifice and worshipped the Sarasvatī he had established that tīrtha, and there the gods in days of yore installed Skanda. In that tīrtha on the Sarasvatī, the ṛṣi Viśvāmitra, by his penances, disturbed Vasiṣṭha. Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha every day challenged each other in respect of the superiority of their penances. Viśvāmitra ordered the Sarasvatī, notwithstanding her trembling, to bring Vasiṣṭha into his presence, that he might slay him. Vasiṣṭha willingly let her so, lest Viśvāmitra should curse her. Sarasvatī washed away one of her banks and bore Vasiṣṭha away and informed Kauśika about his arrival but while Viśvāmitra was looking for a weapon she quickly bore Vasiṣṭha back to the eastern bank. Viśvāmitra cursed her, saying that her current should be changed into blood, which is acceptable only to the Rākṣasas. For a whole year she then flowed bearing blood mixed with water. The gods, the Gandharvas, and the Apsarases grieved. For this reason the tīrtha came to be called . Sarasvatī, however, once more got back her own proper condition, when some munis on a tīrthayātrā to the Sarasvatī, having bathed in all her tīrthas came to . and saw the water mixed with blood, and that innumerable Rākṣasas were drinking it. Having learnt the cause, they worshipped Mahādeva with penances and purified the Sarasvatī. The Rākṣasas, who were Brahma Rākṣasas, afflicted with hunger, sought the protection of the munis, who, having ordained what should be the food of the Rākṣasas solicited the Sarasvatī, who assumed a new shape called Aruṇā bathing in that new river the Rākṣasas abaned their bodies and went to heaven. Ascertaining all this, Indra bathed there and became purified of a grievous sin, .
Vāsiṣṭhī, a tīrtha .
. . Arjuna asked Why did Kalmāṣapāda command his queen to go to Vasiṣṭha And was this an act of sin on the part of Vasiṣṭha The Gandharva said Under the influence of the curse, Kalmāṣapāda, in anger, went out of his capital, accompanied by his wife. In a solitary part of the woods he saw a brahman and his wife embracing each other. The couple ran away, but Kalmāṣapāda forcibly seized the brahman. The brāhmaṇī asked him to liberate her husband, but he cruelly devoured him. The tears that the woman shed blazed up like fire and consumed everything in that place. The brāhmaṇī cursed the rājarṣi, saying that he should meet with instant death when cohabit ing with his wife, and that his wife should have a son from Vasiṣṭha, whose children he had devoured, and that child should be the propagator of his race. Then she entered the fire. Vasiṣṭha, by his ascetic power, immediately knew all about it. And long after this, when the rājarṣi became freed from his curse, he approached his wife Madayantī, not remembering the curse of the brāhmaṇī. Hearing, however, the words of his wife, he recollected the curse, and, therefore, he appointed Vasiṣṭha to beget a son on his queen .
Vasor dhārā, name of a tīrtha . Do. = the river Mandākinī, . Do name of a certain libation of ghee, .
Vastrapa, pl a people .
Vāstu, a river .
Vasu1, surnamed Uparicara, king of the Cedis. . Instructed by Indra king . won the king of the Cedis. Some time after he dwelled in a hermitage practising austerities, from which the gods, headed by Indra, prevailed upon him to refrain. Indra gave him a crystal vimāna capable of carrying him through the air like a god, and a triumphal garland named Indramālā, and a bamboo pole to protect the peaceful. After a year the king planted this pole in the ground in order to worship Indra . Indra came there in the form of a swan to accept the worship, and blessed the men and kings who would observe this festivity, . From the country of the Cedis . ruled the whole world. He installed his five sons as governors of various provinces Bṛhadratha, Pratyagra, Kuśāmba or Maṇivāhana, Māvella, and Yadu they founded kings and towns, named after themselves, and created separate dynasties which lasted for long ages, . Seated in his crystal chariot and coursing through the sky . was aed by Gandharvas and Apsarases, and was called Uparicara. Near his capital flowed the river Śuktimatī, and from love of this river the mountain Kolāhala once barred its course. . then kicked the mountain with his foot, and the river gave him the two children which she had with Kolāhala. . made the male child the commander of his armies, and made the daughter Girikā his wife, . c, . Cedipa, Cedipati, Pauravanandana, Rājoparicara, Uparicara.
Vasu2, a prince, brother of Duṣyanta .
Vasu3, a brahman, father of Paila .
Vasu4, son of Jamadagni .
Vasu5, a king .
Vasu6, a ṛṣi .
Vasu7 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vasu8, mostly pl a class of gods . Paitāmaha Manu was father of Prajāpati, whose sons were the eight Vasus
Vasucandra, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Vasuśreṣṭha = Śiva .
Vasuśrī, a mātṛ. u, .
Vasuda = Viṣṇu .
Vasudā, a mātṛ. u, .
Vasudāmā, a mātṛ. u, .
Vasudāna, king of Pāṃśurāṣṭra . Pāṃśurāṣṭrādhipa.
Vasudeva, son of Śūra, husband of Devakī, etc father of Kṛṣṇa, etc . e, . b, . also the following synonyms Ānakadundubhi, . Śauri, Śūraputra, Śūrasūnu, Śūrasuta, Śūrātmaja, q.v. Yadūdvaha, q.v.
Vāsudeva1 = Kṛṣṇa, q.v. Do. = Balarāma, .
Vāsudeva3, king of the Puṇḍras . Pauṇḍraka, Puṇḍrādhipa.
Vasudevapitṛ = Śūra, .
Vāsudevapriya = Skanda, .
Vasudevaputra = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Vāsudevasahodarā = Subhadrā, .
Vasudevasuta = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Vasudevasutā = Subhadrā, .
Vasudevātmaja = Kṛṣṇa, q.v.
Vasudhā, .
Vasudhādhara = Śeṣa .
Vasudharman, a Kuru warrior, a Trigarta .
Vasuhoma, an Aṅga king .
Vāsuki, king of the serpents . . held a consultation with his brothers how to render the curse of Kadrū abortive several means were proposed and rejected Elāpatra then told that he had heard Brahmán say to the gods that the harmless serpents would be saved by Āstīka, who should be begotten by Jaratkāru on .s sister Jaratkāru . . carefully brought up his sister. After the churning of the ocean . addressed Brahmán, who confirmed the words of Elāpatra. . gave order to watch the ṛṣi Jaratkāru, . . c, . d, ʹ, . g, . u, . b, . Nāgarāj, Nāgarāja, Nāgendra, Pannaga, Pannagarāja, Pannagarājan, Pannageśvara, Pannagendra, Sarparāja, Sarparājan.
Vasumanas1, an ancient king, son of Haryaśva and Mādhavī and grandson of Yayāti . Vasumat, Kausalya3.
Vasumanas2 = Viṣṇu
Vasumat1 = Vasumanas1 . Auṣadaśvi.
Vasumat2, a king at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira .
Vasumat3, a rite .
Vasumat4, a fire, v. Dasyumat .
Vasumat5, a king, son of Janaka .
Vasumatī = the earth, .
Vasumitra, a king .
Vasundharā, .
Vasunandinī, the wife of the Vasu Dyaus .
Vasuprada1, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Vasuprada2 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vasuretas1 = Agni, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vasurūpa = Śiva, .
Vasusambhava = Bhīṣma, .
Vasuṣeṇa = Karṇa, q.v.
Vasuvega = Śiva .
Vasvaukasārā or Vasvokasārā, a river . f, .
Vasvokasārā, the abode of Kubera .
Vaṭa, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Vāta1 = Vāyu, q.v. Do. = Śiva .
Vāṭadhāna1 .
Vāṭadhāna2, the country of the Vāṭadhānas .
Vāṭadhāna, pl a people .
Vātādhipa, a king .
Vātaghna, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Vātaja, pl a people BR. suggests Vātajāma Rathoragāḥ
Vātapati, a Vṛṣṇi prince .
Vātāpi or Vātāpin, an Asura, younger brother of Īlvala . . Asura, Daitya, Ditinandana, Prāhrādi.
Vātaraṃhas = Śiva .
Vātasārathi = Agni, q.v. Add, .
Vātaskandha, a ṛṣi .
Vātātmaja = Bhīmasena, .
Vātavega1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra ʹ, .
Vātavega2, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Vātāyana, pl a people .
Vātika, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Vātika, pl .
Vātikakhaṇḍa, name of a place .
Vatsa1, a prince, son of the Kāśi king Pratardana. b, .
Vatsa2, a prince, the ancestor of the Vatsas. b, .
Vatsa, pl a people . Vātsya, pl.
Vatsabhūmi .
Vatsala1, a warrior of Skanda. u, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vatsara = Viṣṇu .
Vatsarāja .
Vatsin = Viṣṇu .
Vātsya, name of one or more brahmans .
Vātsya, pl a people = Vatsa, pl . b
Vāyava, adj. . u, .
Vāyavya, adj. . d, .
Vāyavyāstra . Vāyavya, adj.
Vāyu1, the god of the wind . b, . b, . c, . d, . u, . b, . b, learnt the religion of Nārāyaṇa from the ṛṣi Sunarṇa and communicated it to the ṛṣisĀnuśā sanik.SuvarṇotpattiBrahma vagni Somānāṃ sālokyaṃĀnuśāsanik.oḥ, sc. lokaṃPavanārjunasaṃv.devadūtaḥdiscourse between . and Arjuna KārtavīryaKṛṣṇa VāsudevaKṛṣṇa identified with ŚivaŚivaŚiva identified with .Ānuśāsanik.Svargārohaṇap.mūrtimataḥthe friend of Anala one of the Vasus, husband of ŚivāAgni identified with A.prītir Asyā gninā yathāo vā vahed MeruṃAgny anilendu Bhānavaḥmano Mraṃhasāfather of Bhīmasenafather of Bhīmasenanāvaṃ...mano MgāminīṃTārkṣya Mraṃhasaḥ Bhīmasyapratimair gatauv. Draupadeya, pl.mano Mraṃhasaḥ, sc. turaṅgamānmano Mraṃhasaḥ, sc. rathāḥvavauAgni MauAgni MsaṃyogātAgni M toyebhyaḥAgni MtoyānāṃAgni MauAgni MauAgni MauākṛtiḥātmāAgny Aśvi MāḥYamasya yaḥ puraḥsaraḥantakaḥmano Mraṃhasaṃād ūrdhvaṃvegavānCandrārka Māḥośanaṃ, adj. sc. lokaṃprāhaavani Maudvitīyaṃ...bhūtaṃvā dadau putraṃ Bhīmaṃ, sc. to PāṇḍuPārtham ātmajaṃ Maḥ, i.e. BhīmasenaArjuna had obtained the Vāyavya weapon from M.eva Pāvakaṃ, sc. santejayanhusband of Sukanyā and father of MaṅkaṇakaPurūravasa Ailasya saṃvādaṃ Maḥsaṅkāśaṃ Maḥasamaṃ Māsadharmā Maḥidentified with KṛṣṇaGaruḍa identified with P.sya niveśanaṃ, in the westḥ pavatām asmi, says Kṛṣṇasya saṃvādam Arjunasya caamong the fathers of the Pāṇḍavasenātha samo balena Ssyaiva sutaḥ, i.e. Bhīmasenafather of Bhīmasenaena Kuntyāṃ...sujātaḥ, sc. BhīmasenaArjuna obtained weapons from . Rasāharau, created by Pāñcajanya from his mouthjave bale ca sadṛśam Aruṇānuja yoḥ
Vāyu2 = Sūrya, . Do. = Skanda, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vāyubala, son of Maṅkaṇaka. j, .
Vāyucakra, son of Maṅkaṇaka. j, .
Vāyuhan, son of Maṅkaṇaka. j, .
Vāyujvāla, son of Maṅkaṇaka. j, .
Vāyuloka .
Vāyumaṇḍala, son of Maṅkaṇaka. j, .
Vāyuputra1 = Bhīma sena, . Do. = Hanūmat, q.v.
Vāyuretas, son of Maṅkaṇaka. j, .
Vāyusuta = Bhīma sena
Vāyutanaya = Bhīmasena, . Do. = Hanūmat, q.v.
Vāyuvāhana1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vāyuvega1, a prince .
Vāyuvega2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Vātavega.
Vāyuvega3, son of Maṅkaṇaka. j, .
Vāyvātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Veda, a brahman . . served his master with hard work a very long time uncomplainingly. He got himself three pupils, and never told them to perform any work, that they might not experience such woe as he had himself experienced from his preceptor. He was appointed upādhyāya by the kings Janamejaya and Pauṣya, .
Veda, mostly pl the sacred knowledge, esp the Vedic literature, .
Vedabhū = Viṣṇu, .
Vedaśiras, a ṛṣi. c, .
Vedāśvā, a river .
Vedādhvarapati = Śiva, .
Vedadeva = Bṛhaspati, .
Vedakāra = Śiva .
Vedakartṛ = Sūrya, .
Vedamātṛ = Gāyatrī, . Do. = Sāvitrī, .
Vedāṅga, pl . Aṅga1.
Vedāṅga2, sg. = Sūrya, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vedāṅgapati = Viṣṇu, .
Vedānta, mostly pl a kind of literary works, probably identical with the Upaniṣads, . Do sg. = Durgā, .
Vedasmṛtā, a river . next.
Vedasmṛti, a river . the prec.
Vedātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vedavāhana = Sūrya, .
Vedavatī, a river .
Vedavid = Viṣṇu .
Vedavyāsa = Vyāsa, q.v.
Vedayajñādhipati = Viṣṇu, .
Vedhas1 = Śiva, . Do. = Dharma, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do pl. = the Prajāpatis, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vedī, a tīrtha . Do the wife of Brahmán, .
Vedī Prajāpateḥ, a tīrtha .
Vedītīrtha, a tīrtha .
Vedya = Viṣṇu .
Vegavat1, a serpent .
Vegavat2, one or more Asuras .
Vegavat3, a Rākṣasa .
Vegavat4 = Viṣṇu .
Vena, one or more ancient princes .
Veṇā, a river .
Veṇātaṭa, pl a people .
Veṇavin, see Vaiṇavin.
Veṇika, pl a people .
Veṇikā, see Sītā.
Veṇin, a serpent .
Veṇīskandha, a serpent .
Veṇudārisuta, a prince .
Veṇujaṅgha, a muni .
Veṇumaṇḍala, a varṣa on Kuśadvīpa .
Veṇupa, pl a people .
Veṇuvīṇādhārā, a mātṛ. u, .
Veṇvā, Veṇyā, v. Veṇā.
Vetālajananī, a mātṛ. u, .
Vetasaka, pl name of a place .
Vetasikā, a tīrtha .
Vetrakīyagṛha, name of the residence of a certain king .
Vetrakīyavana, name of a forest . prec.
Vetravatī, a river .
Vetrika, pl a people .
Vibhāga, Vibhāgajña = Śiva .
Vibhakta = Skanda, .
Vibhāṇḍa, a ṛṣi .
Vibhāṇḍaka, a ṛṣi, father of Ṛṣyaśṛṅga . Kāśyapa.
Vibhāvasu1, a ṛṣi, brother of Supratīka .
Vibhāvasu2, a ṛṣi .
Vibhāvasu3 = Agni, .
Vibhāvasu4 = Sūrya, .
Vibhinna = Śiva .
Vibhīṣaṇa1, a Yakṣa .
Vibhīṣaṇa2, a Rākṣasa prince, brother of Kubera and Rāvaṇa . Paulastya.
Vibhīṣaṇa3 = Śiva .
Vibhīṣaṇā, a mātṛ. u, .
vibhītaka, the tree Terminalia Bellerica, foll .
Vibhu1, a prince, son of the Kāśi king . Abhibhū.
Vibhu2, the sixth son of Bhṛgu. b, . Vareṇya2.
Vibhu3 = Śiva, . Do. = Skanda, . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Vibhūrasi, name of a fire .
Vibhūti, son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Vibudha = Śiva .
Vibudhādhipa, Vibudhādhipati = Indra, q.v.
Vibudhaśreṣṭha1 = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Indra, . Do. = Sūrya, . Do. = Viṣṇu, . Do. = Brahmán and Śiva, .
Vibudhadviṣ, pl. = Asura, pl .
Vibudhaloka = Devaloka, .
Vibudhārighna = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vibudhasattama = Skanda, .
Vibudhavidviṣ, pl. = Vibudhadviṣ, pl .
Vibudheśvara1 = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Indra, .
Vicakhnu or Vicakhyu, a king .
Vicāravid = Śiva .
Vicitra, a king .
Vicitrarūpa = Hiraṇyagarbha, .
Vicitravīrya, a king, son of Śāntanu and Satyavatī . Kaurava, Kauravya, Kurukulodvaha.
. . Satyavatī related to Bhīṣma the birth of Dvaipāyana, who instantly came when Kālī thought of him, and promised to raise offspring in the wis of Vicitravīrya. As there was no time for them to observe a rigid vow for one full year, he ordered that they should tolerate his ugliness. Satyavatī first addressed herself to Kausalyā and fed brahmans, devarṣis, and guests . Ambikā, seeing Vyāsa, closed her eyes in fear therefore her son, though he was destined to be mighty, etc and to have sons, had to be blind. After his birth, Vyāsa approached Ambālikā, who became pale with fear therefore, her son was pale and was named Pāṇḍu. Ambālikā refused to receive Vyāsa again and sent him a śūdra maid of hers, aned with her own ornaments on her he begat Vidura, who was Dharma, born under the curse of Māṇḍavya. Vyāsa then disappeared .
. . When Vicitravīrya had come of age, Bhīṣma went to Vārāṇasī to the svayaṃvara of the three daughters of the king of Kāśi, and, in order to marry them to Vicitravīrya, he carried them off with force to Hāstinapura . The eldest, Ambā, he let free before the wedding, as she declared that she, in her heart, had chosen the Saubha king, and had been chosen by him. Ambikā and Ambālikā he bestowed on Vicitravīrya. After seven years Vicitravīrya died of con sumption .
Viśākha1, a god, a son or form of Skanda. b, . u, .
Viśākha2 = Śiva .
Viśākhā, name of a nakṣatra, v. Su. Si .
Viśākhayūpa, name of a sacred place .
Viśāṃ patiḥ = Śiva .
Viśāla1 = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva .
Viśālā, wife of Ajamīḍha .
Viśālā = Badarī, .
Viśālā, name of one or more rivers. i, . t By bathing in . in Karavīrapura and offering oblations of water to the pitṛs, and by bathing in Devahrada one becomes identified with Bráhman, .
Viśālaśākha = Śiva .
Viśālaka, a Yakṣa .
Viśālākṣa1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Viśālākṣa2, a Matsya warrior .
Viśālākṣa3, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Viśālākṣa4 = Śiva, q.v.
Viśālākṣa5, v. Vaiśālākṣa.
Viśālākṣī, a mātṛ. u, .
Viśalyā, a river .
viśalyā, name of a certain medicinal plant, .
Viśārada = Śiva .
Viśirā, v. Vasudā.
Viśiṣṭa, Viśodhana = Viṣṇu .
Viśoka1, the charioteer of Bhīmasena .
Viśoka2, a Kaikeya prince .
Viśoka3 = Viṣṇu .
Viśokā, a mātṛ. u, .
Viśoṣaṇa, a celestial weapon .
Viśrāma = Viṣṇu .
Viśravas, a muni or ṛṣi = Pulastya .
Viśrutātman, Viśuddhātman = Viṣṇu .
Viśuṇḍi, a serpent .
Viśva1, a prince .
Viśva2 = Viśvakarman, .
Viśva3 = Śiva, . Do. = mahān ātmā, . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Viśvā, daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa .
Viśvabāhu1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Viśvabhāvana = Viṣṇu, .
Viśvabhū = Viṣṇu, .
Viśvabhuj1, name of one of the five Indras .
Viśvabhuj2, name of a fire .
Viśvabhuj3 = Indra, .
Viśvabhuj4 = Viṣṇu, .
Viśvācī, an Apsaras .
Viśvadakṣiṇa = Viṣṇu .
Viśvadaṃṣṭra, an Asura. b, .
Viśvadeva = Śiva, .
Viśvadeva, pl. = Viśve devāḥ, .
Viśvadṛś = Viṣṇu .
Viśvagaśva1, v. Viṣvagaśva.
Viśvagupta = Viṣṇu, .
Viśvajit1, a fire .
Viśvajit2, an Asura. b, .
Viśvajit3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Viśvakarmakṛt = Śiva, .
Viśvakarmamati = Śiva .
Viśvakarman, the celestial artificer, sometimes identified with Brahmán or Tvaṣṭṛ . c, . b, . b, Bhaumana, Prajāpati, Viśva, Viśvakṛt.
Viśvakarman2 = Maya, .
Viśvakarman3 = Viṣṇu, .
Viśvakarman4 = Śiva, .
Viśvakartṛ = Śiva .
Viśvakṛt1 = Brahmán, .
Viśvakṛt2 = Śiva .
Viśvakṛt3 = Viśvakarman1, .
Viśvakṛt4 = Mahāpuruṣa .
Viśvakṛt5 = Viṣṇu, .
Viśvakṛt6, a Viśvadeva .
Viśvakṛtāṃ vareṇyaḥ = Śiva .
Viśvaksena, v. Viṣvaksena.
Viśvakṣetra = Śiva .
Viśvāmitra, a ṛṣi, son of Gādhi bis . . had deprived Vasiṣṭha of his children though born as a kṣatriya he became a brahman through his penances, and created the river Kauśikī for his ablutions there, his wife, during a famine, was maintained by the rājarṣi Mataṅga, who was living as a hunter therefore, when the famine was over, . changed the name of the river into Pārā and performed a sacrifice for Mataṅga, and Indra himself, from fear, came there to drink soma. in anger, created another world and a series of nakṣatras, beginning with Pratiśravaṇa, and gave pro tection to Triśaṅku, who was cursed by his guru he could burn the three worlds by his splenr, and by a kick cause the earth to quake he could sever Meru, and hurl it away at any distance he could go round the earth in a moment, and Yama, Soma, the maharṣis, the Sādhyas, the Viśvas, and the Vālakhilyas are afraid of his prowess. To him Indra sent the Apsaras Menakā, who, assisted by Vāya and Manmatha, disturbed his penances . . begat on Menakā a daughter, whom she abaned on the banks of the Mālinī in the valleys of Himavat. Vultures protected the child from Rākṣasas and carnivorous animals, until she was found and reared by Kaṇva, who called her Śakuntalā, because she had been protected by the birds, . c, . n The great kṣatriya Gādhi Kauśika became a great ascetic having resolved to give up his body, he installed his son Viśvāmitra on the throne, notwithstanding the solicitations of his subjects, and went to heaven. however, could not protect the earth even with his best exertions. He then heard of a great fear of Rākṣasas, and went out with his army. In the hermitage of Vasiṣṭha his troops caused much mischief when the brahman Vasiṣṭha came to his hermitage, he became angry and commanded his cow to create many terrible Śabaras, who, encountering the army of caused a great carnage, and the troops fied away. . then set his heart on ascetic austerities, and in this tīrtha of the Sarasvatī he began to emaciate his own body, although the gods repeatedly attempted to interrupt him. Brahmán granted him the boon that he should become a brahman. Then he wandered over the whole earth like a celestial, . p, . . b, Ānuśāsanik.became a brahman, etc.v. Śunaḥśephaenumeration of the feats of .Viśvāmitrop.read brahmarṣiṃ brahmavādinaṃbrāhmaṇatāṃ yātaḥ, the wife of Gādhi bore a son who afterwards became a brahman and founder of a race of brahmansātmajāḥ, enumeration of the sons of .Ānuśāsanik.had, by the grace of Śiva, become a brahmanpreceptor of Gālavaamong the ṛṣis who came to see Bhīṣmaeṇa ca purā brāhmaṇyaṃ prāptaṃCyavana Kuśikasaṃv kṣatriyaṃ viprakarmāṇaṃ...Gādheḥ putraṃjanma...muner sya, all. to bBisa stainyop.etymologyŚapathavidhiĀnuśāsanik.became a brahman by confining himself to one meal a day during, celestial yearsKauśikaḥ, one of the seven Dhaneśvarasya guravaḥone of the ṛṣis of the northAnugītāp.ādayo nṛpāḥattained to high successMausalap.cursed Śāmba, etc.
Viśvāmitrā, a river .
Viśvāmitraduhitṛ = Śakuntalā, .
Viśvāmitranadī .
Viśvāmitrapriya = Skanda, .
b . Bhīṣma said King Ajamīḍha king Jahnu Sindhudvīpa R ṛ Balākāśva Vallabha Kuśika Gādhi, who, being childless and desiring to have a son, repaired to the forest, where the beautiful Satyavatī was born to him. Cyavanas son, Ṛcīka Bhārgava, asked for her hand but as he was poor, Gādhi required of him as a er, white horses having one black ear, which he obtained from Varuṇa . Ṛcīka granted her a boon, that she should have a son she related this to her mother, who prevailed upon her to obtain a son also for her having promised them both a son, he told the mother to embrace an aśvattha tree and Satyavatī an uḍumbara tree, and each of them to eat a certain caru, consecrated with hymns. The mother exchanged both the trees and the carus. Ṛcīka had placed the entire brahman energy in Satyavatīs caru and the kṣatriya energy in that of her mother therefore, thy mother will give birth to an excellent brahman and thou to a terrible kṣatriya. Satyavatī prevailed upon him, that not her son, but her sons son should be such. Then, by the favour of Ṛcīka, she gave birth to Jamadagni, and the wife of Gādhi to the Brahmarṣi Viśvāmitra, versed in the Vedas . Viśvāmitra attained to the state of a brahman, and became the founder of a race of brahmans. Madhucchanda, etc were all sons of Viśvāmitra .
Viśvamūrti1 = Śiva, . Do. = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Viśvanara = Śiva, .
Viśvāṅga = Kṛṣṇa, .
Viśvapara = Viṣṇu, .
Viśvapati, name of a fire .
Viśvaretas = Viṣṇu .
Viśvaruci, a Gandharva .
Viśvarūpa1, an Asura .
Viśvarūpa2, son of Tvaṣṭṛ . b, Tvāṣṭraḥ purohitaḥ devānāṃmātaraṃTvāṣṭro as Triśirā devānāṃ purohitaḥ the son of Tvaṣṭṛ and an Asura woman, was the purohita of the gods, but afterwards he joined the Asuras and was then slain by Indra with the thunderbolt, Saṃvartta Maruttīyasya nihantā, i.e. Indra
Viśvarūpa3 = Śiva, . Do. = Hiraṇya garbha, . Do. = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Viśvarūpadhṛk1 = Viṣṇu, . Do. = Vṛtra, .
Viśvasambhava1 = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Viśvasattama = Kṛṣṇa, .
Viśvasena, a Gandharva. b, .
Viśvasṛj1 = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do pl .
Viśvātman1 = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Hiraṇyagarbha, . Do. = Sūrya, . Do. = Viṣṇu, . Do. = Vṛtra, .
Viśvatomukha = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva .
Viśvāvāsa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Viśvāvasu, a Gandharva king . b, v. . d, . b, . b, . b, . b, . e, . Gandharva, Gandharvarāja, Gandharvendra, Kāśyapa.
Viśvāvasu2, son of Jamadagni .
Viśvāvasu3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
. . Jaṭāyu attacked Rāvaṇa, who cut off his wings. Rāvaṇa entered Laṅkā with Sītā. Jaṭāyu indicated to Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa that Rāvaṇa had gone towards the south, and then he died. Rāma caused his funeral obsequies to be duly performed. Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa killed a Rākṣasa named Kabandha, from whose body there came out a celestial person, viz. the Gandharva prince Viśvāvasu, who had been cursed by a brahman he directed them to Sugrīva, who dwelled at the lake Pampā, near the mountain Ṛṣyamūka, with his four counsellors then he disappeared .
Viśvāvatī = Gaṅgā, .
Viśvayoni1 = Brahmán, . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Viśvāyu, a Viśvadeva .
Viśve, pl. . b, ʹ, . u, . ee, . gg, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . b, . b, . d, . f, . b, Viśvadeva, pl Viśvedeva, pl.
Viśveśa1 = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Viśveśvara1 = Brahmán, . Do. = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Mahāpuruṣa . Do dual = Brahmán and Śiva, .
Viśveśvarasthāna, a tīrtha, sacred to Viśveśvara .
Viśvedeva, pl. = Viśve . bis, . u, .
Viśvedeva = Śiva, .
Viśvopākhyāna, v. Śvetopākhyāna.
Vidaṇḍa, a prince .
Vidabha, pl a people .
Vidāraṇa = Viṣṇu .
Vidarbha = Bhīma, .
Vidarbha, pl a people . Daśī Vidarbha, pl.
Vidarbhā, the metropolis of the Vidarbhas . Kuṇḍina.
Vidarbhādhipanandinī = Damayantī, .
Vidarbhādhipati = Bhīma1, .
Vidarbhapati =, .
Vidarbharāj =, .
Vidarbharāja1 =, .
Vidarbharāja2, the father of Lopāmudrā .
Vidarbharāja3, a prince .
Vidarbharājan = Bhīma1, .
Vidarbharājatanayā = Damayantī, .
Vidarbhatanayā =, .
Videha, pl a people . b, .
Videha, sg. .
Videharāja1, a prince at the time of Yudhiṣṭhira .
Videharāja2 = Janaka, .
Videharājaduhitṛ .
Videharājan = Janaka, .
vidhāna, .
Vidharma = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vidhātṛ . u, . b, . b, . d, . g, .
Vidhātṛ = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vidheyātman = Viṣṇu .
vidhi
Vidiśā, a river .
Vidiśaḥ = Viṣṇu .
Vidigbhānu = Mahāpuruṣa .
Vidulā, a princess, mother of Sañjaya, the Sauvīra king .
Vidulāputraśāsana . The princess Vidulā one day rebuked her son Sañjaya, who, being defeated by the king of the Sindhus, was lying dejected. Without wrath, as thou art, thou canst not be counted as a man...It is better to blaze up for a moment than to smoke for a long time...He who has not achieved a great feat, forming the subject of mens conversation, only increases the number of men he is neither man nor woman ...It behoves thee not to at the idle, wretched, infamous, and miserable profession of mendicancy that is worthy only of a coward...He is a man who cherishes wrath and s not forgive......The followers of the Sindhu king are all discontented and waiting for the distress of their master others will come to thee with their auxiliaries if they behold thee put forth thy prowess... While thou wert a child, a brahman said this one, falling into great distress, will again win greatness. Śambara has said there is not a more miserable state than that in which one s not see how to procure his food from day to day. By slaying Vṛtra, Indra became Mahendra, and obtained the soṃa cup of Mahendra, and the lordship of all the worlds...Sovereignty is either the r of heaven or amṛta... In the possession of wealth, rejoice, as before, with the Sauvīra maidens, and be not ruled over by the Saindhava maidens...Handed n by tradition from time immemorial, the eternal essence of kṣatriya virtues has been ordained by Prajāpati himself... A kṣatriya should rather break than yield. He should bow n to brahmans only and to virtue he should rule over all other orders, destroying all evil rs . The son complained that the heart of his mother was made of steel, and blamed the kṣatriya practices. Vidulā said that if Sañjaya was about to be stained by infamy and she did not say it to him, her affection for him would be like that of a she ass for her young. He ought to have recourse to virtue and profit ...We have many treasure houses unknown to thee...thou hast also more than one friend. Despair left Sañjayas heart, though he was not gifted with great intelligence. He roused himself and achieved all that his mother had pointed out. Indeed, this history, named Jaya, should be listened to by everyone desirous of victory, etc. .
Vidura d ʹ, . b, . . also the following synonyms Ājamīdha, q.v. Bhārata, Bharatarṣabha, q.v. Kaurava, q.v. Kṣattṛ, . Kurunandana, q.v.
Vidūra, v. Vidūratha1.
Vidurāgamana .
. . . The news had been reported to all the monarchs that Draupadī had been married to the sons of Pāṇḍu, whom they had thought burnt to death. They then set out for their own inions. Duryodhana became greatly depressed, and, with his brothers, etc he set out for Hāstinapura. Vidura was filled with joy, and related the news to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who first thought that it was Duryodhana who had been selected by Draupadī, but was very glad on hearing that it was the Pāṇḍavas. But Duryo dhana and Karṇa tried to stir him up against them . Dhṛtarāṣṭra said that he was of their opinion, but did not wish to inform Vidura of it therefore he had applauded the Pāṇḍavas in Viduras presence. Duryodhana suggested several plans for getting the better of the Pāṇḍavas . Karṇa said that the plans would not succeed he recom mended to vanquish them by prowess, while their party was yet weak. Dhṛtarāṣṭra summoned Bhīṣma, Droṇa, and Vidura, and consulted with them . Bhīṣma recom mended to give to the Pāṇḍavas one half of the king . Droṇa approved of this, and, moreover, recom mended that a messenger should be sent to Drupada with gifts, and say that Dhṛtarāṣṭra was very glad of the new alliance with him, and would take the Pāṇḍavas to Hāstinapura to be installed on the throne. . Karṇa spoke con temptuously of Bhīṣma and Droṇa, saying that happiness depended on destiny, and not on friends, etc mentioning the Magadha king Ambuvīca . . Vidura recommended the suggestion of Bhīṣma and Droṇa, and said that the Pāṇḍavas were invincible, as they were assisted by Rāma, Janārdana, Sātyaki, etc. . Vidura was sent by Dhṛtarāṣṭra with numerous jewels, etc to Drupada and the Pāṇḍavas . Vidura said that Dhṛtarāṣṭra was highly pleased with the alliance with Drupada, and asked Drupada to permit the Pāṇḍavas, with their mother and wife, to return to their paternal city .
. Bhīṣma married king Devakas daughter, who was by caste a pārasavī, to Vidura, who begat upon her many children as excellent as himself .
Vidūratha1, son of Kuru and Śubhāṅgī .
Vidūratha2, a Vṛṣṇi prince .
Vidūrathasuta . b, .
Vidvat = Śiva .
Vidvattama = Viṣṇu .
Vidyā, a goddess . Do pl. .
Vidyādhara, pl a class of supernatural beings, .
Vidyādharādhipa = Cakra dharman, .
Vidyādharendra = Jāmbavat, .
Vidyādharī, .
Vidyātīrtha, name of a tīrtha .
Vidyāvāsa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Vidyotā, an Apsaras. b, .
Vidyudvarcas, a Viśvadeva .
Vidyujjihva, a Rākṣasa .
Vidyujjihvā, a mātṛ. u, .
Vidyunmālin, an Asura. d, .
Vidyutā, an Apsaras. b, .
Vidyutākṣa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Vidyutparṇā, an Apsaras .
Vidyutprabha1, a Dānava. e Pleased with Mahādeva granted him the sovereignty of the three worlds which he enjoyed for a hundred thousand years. Śiva further granted him that he should become one of his attendants and obtain a hundred millions of children, and gave him the region named Kuśadvīpa, .
Vidyutprabha2, a ṛṣi .
Vidyutprabhā, pl name of ten Apsaras .
Vidyutstanitagarjita = Śiva .
Vigāhana, a king.
Vighneśa = Gaṇeśa, .
Vigraha, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Vihaṅga, a serpent .
Vihaṅgama = Sūrya, .
Vihavya, a brahman. b, .
Vihāyasagati = Viṣṇu .
Vihṛṣṭa = Śiva .
Vijaya1, an ancient king .
Vijaya2 = Arjuna, q.v.
Vijaya3, the dart of Śiva .
Vijaya4, name of bows. d, . c . was made by Viśvakarman for Indra, who, with that bow, vanquished the Daityas. From Indra it passed over to Paraśurāma, and from him to Karṇa it is superior to the Gāṇḍīva, .
Vijaya5, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Vijaya6 a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Vijaya7 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vijaya, pl a people .
Vijayā, a Daśārha princess .
Vijayā, a Madra princess .
Vijayā = Durgā, .
Vijayā, the garland of Kṛṣṇa .
Vijayakālavid, Vijayākṣa = Śiva .
Vijitātman = Viṣṇu .
Vikāśinī, a mātṛ. u, .
Vikalya, pl a people .
Vikarṇa1, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Bharatarṣabha, Bharatasattama, Dhārtarāṣṭra, Dhṛtarāṣṭraja, Duryodhanāvara, Kurupravīra, Kuruvar dhana, dual.
Vikarṇa2, a ṛṣi .
Vikarṇa, pl a people .
Vikartana, .
Vikartṛ = Viṣṇu .
Vikata1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Vikaṭānana.
Vikaṭa2, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Vikaṭānana, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . Vikaṭa.
Vikhyāta = Śiva .
Vikrama1, a companion of Skanda. u, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vikramin1, an ancient king . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vikrīta, a Prajāpati. b
Vikṛta1. b, . Do. = Śiva .
Vikṛtavaktra = Śiva .
Vikṛti = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vikṣara1, an Asura . Asura.
Vikṣara2 = Viṣṇu .
Vikṣit . Avikṣit.
Vikuñja, pl a people .
Vikuṇṭha = Viṣṇu, . Vaikuṇṭha.
Vikuṇṭhana, a prince .
Vikurvaṇā = Śiva .
Vilohita = Śiva, .
Vimala, name of a tīrtha .
Vimalā, daughter of Surabhi .
Vimalāśoka, name of a tīrtha .
Vimala saras, a tīrtha .
Vimalapiṇḍaka, a serpent .
Vimalodā or Vimalodakā, one of the seven Sarasvatīs. i, .
Vimarṣa = Śiva .
Viṃśa, son of Ikṣvāku. b, .
Vimocana1, a tīrtha .
Vimocana2 = Śiva .
Vimuca, a ṛṣi .
Vimukta = Śiva .
Vimuktātman = Viṣṇu .
Vīṇā, a river .
Vinaśana, a tīrtha . b The gate of the king of the Niṣādas where the Sarasvatī disappears from hatred of them, .
Vināśana, an Asura . Candrasya vināśanaḥ .
Vinadī, a river .
Vinata = Śiva .
Vinatā, daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa, mother of the Vainateyas, i.e. Garuḍa, etc . . Dākṣāyaṇī, sg. and dual.
Vinatānandavardhana = Garuḍa, .
Vinatāsūnu = Garuḍa, .
Vinatāsuta = Garuḍa, .
Vinatātmaja = Garuḍa, .
Vināyaka, pl a class of demons. b, .
Vinayitṛ = Viṣṇu .
Vinda1, an Avanti prince, brother of Anuvinda1 . Āvantyau, Vinda3.
Vinda2, a Kaikeya prince, brother of Anuvinda2 . Kaikaya, sg. and dual, Kaikeya, sg. and dual.
Vinda3, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Vindhaculaka, pl v. Vindhyaculika, pl.
Vindhya, name of a mountain . . once asked the Sun to honour him with circumambulations as he did Meru, and as the sun declared it impossible, from wrath, began to increase and obstructed the path of the Sun, the Moon, and the nakṣatras. As the gods could not dissuade him, they applied to Agastya, who, with his wife came, and, saying that he should have to go to the southern region, prevailed upon . to cease to increase until he should have returned. But to this day he has not returned from the southern region, . f, . d, . u, . d, . v, . g, .
Vindhyaculika, pl a people .
Vinītātman, an ancient king .
Vipāśā, a river . k, . v, . m, . b, .
Vipaṇa = Śiva .
Vipāpa, name of a fire .
Vipāpā, a river .
Vipāpman, a Viśvadeva .
Vipāṭha, younger brother of Karṇa .
Vipracitta, v. Vipracitti.
Vipracitti, an Asura . b, . Daiteya, Dānava, Dānavarṣabha.
Viprarṣi1, pl. = Brahmarṣi, pl . g, .
Viprarṣi2, sg. = sg. Unnamed Viprarṣis mentioned, . Names of single Viprarṣis Agastya, . Akṛtavraṇa, . Aṇīmāṇḍavya, . Ariṣtanemi, . Aṣtāvakra, . Atri, . Aurva, . Bharadvāja, . Bhṛgu, . Cyavana, . Śaktri, . Śarmin, . Śaunaka, . Śunaka, . Droṇa, . Durvāsas, . Gālava, . Gṛtsamada, . Jājali, . Jamadagni, . Kāśyapa, . Kauśika6, . Likhita, . Mandapāla, . Mārkaṇḍeya, . Mudgala, . Nārada, . Paippalādi, . Parāśara, . Pulastya, . Rāma Jāmadagnya, . Ṛcīka, . Ṛṣabha, . Saṃvarta, . Sārasvata, . Upamanyu, . Uttaṅka, . Vaiśampāyana, . Vasiṣṭha, . Vibhāṇḍaka, . Viśravas, . Viśvāmitra, . Vipula, . Vyāsa, . Yājñavalkya, . Yavakrīta, .
Vipṛthu1, a Vṛṣṇi prince .
Vipṛthu2, an ancient king . Pṛthu.
Vipula1, a Sauvīra king .
Vipula2, a ṛṣi of Bhṛgus race . b, . Bhārgava, Bhṛgusattama, Bhṛgūdvaha, Bhṛgūttama, Viprarṣi.
b . Bhīṣma said There was, in days of yore, a Ṛ. Devaśaraman his beautiful wife Ruci fascinated every one who saw her, both G and Dā and particularly Indra. Devaśarman knew very well the disposition of women, as well as Indras coveting other mens wives. Once, desirous of performing a sacrifice, he summoned his favourite disciple Vipula Bhārgava, and asked him, during his absence, to protect Ruci against Indra, describing to him the disguises that Indra assumes . Vipula, by his Yoga power, entered the body of Ruci . Indra came, but Ruci was unable to move or to utter a word in reply then, influenced by Vipula, she answered in Sanskrit words that she did not intend to utter. Indra became perplexed, and when he with his spiritual eye discovered Vipula within Ruci, he became afraid that he might curse him. Vipula left the body of Ruci and returned to his own body which was lying near, and rebuked Indra, mention ing Gautamas curse, owing to which Indras body became disfigured with, sex marks, which, owing to Gautamas compassion, were afterwards changed into eyes, see that thou t not, with thy sons and counselors, meet with destruction. Śakra, overwhelmed with shame, made himself invisible. A moment after, Devaśarman came back, and granted Vipula the boon that he should never swerve away from righteousness dismissed by his preceptor, Vipula left his abode and practised the most severe austerities. Deva śarman also, with his spouse, began to live in the woods, perfectly fearless of Indra . Vipula became full of pride. After some time the occasion came for a ceremony of gifts, with respect to the sister of Ruci the Aṅga king Citraratha. Meanwhile, a celestial damsel dropped some flowers n to the earth they were picked up by Ruci, who, aned with them, went to the palace of the Aṅga king. Her sister, Prabhāvatī, the Aṅga queen, urged her to obtain some for her, and Ruci informed her husband, who, summoning Vipula, commanded him to bring him some flowers of the same kind. Vipula found some such flowers still lying scattered, quite fresh, and set out for Campā on his way he saw a human couple moving in a circle, hand in hand a dispute arose between them, and at last, each of them took the oath that one of us who speaks falsely shall, in the next world, meet with the end which will be Vipulas. Vipula became very sad proceeding a little way he beheld six other men playing with dice made of gold and silver they were heard by Vipula to take the same oath as the first couple. At last he recollected the manner in which he had acted in protecting his preceptors wife, without telling his preceptor the truth. Coming to Campā, he gave the flowers to his preceptor . Devaśarman, too, knew what he had seen on his way, and how he had acted in protecting Ruci he explained that the first couple were Day and Night, the others the six Seasons. He absolved Vipula and ascended to heaven with his wife and his disciple. Mārkaṇḍeya had narrated this tale to Bhīṣma on the banks of the Gaṅgā .
Vīra1, an Asura . v. .
Vīra2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Vīra3, a prince .
Vīra4, name of a fire, .
Vīra5, a god .
Vīra6, a Bhoja prince .
Vīra7 = Viṣṇu .
Vīrā, wife of the fire Bharadvāja .
Vīrā, a river .
Vīrabāhu1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Vīrabāhu2, a Cedi king .
Vīrabāhu3 = Viṣṇu .
Vīrabhadra1, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Vīrabhadra2, a divine being evolved from Śiva. b, .
Vīrāśrama, a tīrtha .
Vīradhanvan, a Trigarta warrior .
Vīradharman, a king .
Vīradyumna, a king, father of Bhūridyumna .
Vīrahan = Viṣṇu .
Virāj1, name of the primeval being, identified with Śiva and Viṣṇu, . Do. fem. = Pṛthivī, . Do fem. = Sarasvatī, .
Viraja1, a tīrtha .
Viraja2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Virāja, son of Avikṣit .
Virajas1, a serpent .
Virajas2, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Virajas3, a spiritual son of Nārāyaṇa .
Virajas4, son of Kavi. b, .
Vīraka, pl a people .
Vīrakarā, v. Vīraṅkarā.
Vīraketu, a Pāñcāla warrior . Pāñcālakulanandana, Pāñcālaputra, Pāñcālya.
Virāma1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣnu .
Vīraṇa, a Prajāpati. b, Prajāpatiḥlearnt the religion of Nārāyaṇa from Sanatkumāra, and taught it to Raibhya
Vīraṇaka, a serpent .
Vīraṅkarā, a river .
Vīrapramokṣa, a tīrtha .
Virasa, a serpent .
Vīrasena, king of the Niṣadhas, father of Nala .
Vīrasenasuta = Nala, q.v.
vīrāṣṭaka, .
Virāta, king of the Matsyas, husband of Sudeṣṇā, father of Śaṅkha, Uttara, and Uttarā . Matsya, Matsyapati, Matsyarāj, Matsyarāja, Matsyarājan.
Virāṭa = Virāṭaparvan, .
Virāṭaduhitṛ = Uttarā, .
Virāṭajā = Uttarā, .
Virāṭanagara, .
Virāṭanṛpati, v. Virāṭa.
Virāṭaparvan, the fourth book of the Mhbhr. . c, . Vairāṭa.
Virāṭaputra1 = Babhru, .
Virāṭaputra2 = Śaṅkha, .
Virāṭaputra3 = Uttara, .
Virāṭarāj, Viraṭarāja, Virāṭarājan, v. Virāṭa.
Virāṭatanayā = Uttarā, .
Virāva, name of a horse .
Vīravatī, a river .
Virāvin, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Vīrin, pl a family .
Viriñca = Brahmán. b, . next.
Viriñci = Brahmán .
Vīriṇī, wife of Dakṣa .
Virocana1, an Asura . At the svayaṃvara of Keśinī, . and Sudhanvan staked their lives as to who of them was superior, and referred the question to Prahlāda, . b, . b, . b, . Daiteya, Daityendra, Prāhrādi.
Virocana2, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Virocana3 = Sūrya, . Do. = Soma, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Virocanā, a mātṛ. u, .
Virohaṇa, a serpent .
Virūpa1, an Asura .
Virūpa2, b, .
Virūpa3, son of Aṅgiras. b, .
Virūpa4 = Śiva .
Virūpāśva, an ancient king .
Virūpaka, an Asura. b, .
Virūpākṣa1 = Śiva, q.v. .
Virūpākṣa2, an Asura .
Virūpākṣa3, name of several Rākṣasas . b, . Rākṣasa, Rākṣasādhipa, Rākṣasādhipati, Rākṣasendra.
Virūpākṣa4, a Rudra .
Virūpākṣī = Durgā, .
Vīryātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vīryavat, a Viśvadeva .
Vīryavatī, a mātṛ. u, .
Visarga = Śiva .
Viṣāgnipā, Viṣāgrapād = Śiva .
Viṣama = Viṣṇu .
Viṣaṇṇāṅga = Śiva .
Viṣaprastha, a mountain .
Viṣayagoptṛ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Viṣkambhin = Śiva .
Viṣkara, v. Viskara.
Viṣṇu1, one of the Ādityas, also named Hari, identified with the Supreme Lord Nārāyaṇa, husband of Lakṣmī in the Mhbhr. his principal incarnation is that as Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva . b, . . . d, . . . . . . b, . b, . . . . . b, . bis, . . . . b, . . c . is the infinite Spirit, etc who, at the termina tion of a yuga in the form of the all consuming fire, burns the world and the Nāgalokas who dwell in the Pātāla, whereafter clouds appear in the sky and pour n rain that extinguishes the fire . When, at the end of, yugas, the earth becomes flooded with water, the Supreme being, under the name of Nārāyaṇa, with, eyes, and, feet, and, heads, sleeps upon Śeṣa, who has, hoods, etc enveloping all space with nocturnal gloom. And when his creative faculty in stirred he awakes and finds the world deserted Etymology of the name Nārāyaṇa . When he was engaged in meditation for the re creation of the universe, a lotus came into existence from his navel, and from this the four faced Brahmán came out, who, sitting on the lotus, from his mind created the nine great ṛṣis Marīci, etc who were equal to himself. They created the Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Bhūtas, Piśācas, serpents, and men. In the form of Brahmán he creates, in the form of Puruṣa he preserves, and in the form of Rudra he destroys the universe, . d .s incarnations are the following a boar yojanas in length half lion, half man, when he killed the Daitya king Hiraṇyakaśipu, who attacked him with his śūla the son of Kaśyapa and Aditi, in the form of a dwarf, born, years after the conception, of the hue of rain charged clouds and with bright eyes when he, accompanied by Bṛhaspati, entered the sacrificial assembly of Bali, the king of the Dānavas, he, in three paces, took in the earth and gave it to Indra Kṛṣṇa, with conchshell, discus, and mace, aned with the Śrīvatsa, clad in yellow silken robes, who protects Arjuna, riding in the same chariot with him, . . . c, . . b, . . c, . g, . b, . c, . b, . d, . b, . b, . g, . b, . . . c, . Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa, and the following synonyms Abhibhū, . Acintya, q.v add, . Acyuta, q.v. . Aśvaciras, Ādideva, Ādikara, q.v. Aditinandana, . Ādityapati, q.v. Aja, q.v. Ajita, . Amadhya, . Anādi, . Anādimadhyanidhana, . Anādhimadhyānta, . Anādimadhyaparyanta, . Anādinidhana, . Anādya, . Ananta, . Aravindākṣa, Asurasūdana, Avyakta, Avyaya, q.v. Bhagavat, q.v. Bhūtācārya, Bhūtarāj, . Cakradhara, Cakragadāpāṇī, Cakrapāṇi, Cakrāyudha, v. Kṛṣṇa. Caturbhuja, . Caturmūrtidhṛt, q.v. Śakrānuja, . Śālagrāma, Śambhu, q.v. Śaṅkhacakragadādhara, v. Kṛṣṇa. Śipiviṣṭa, Śrīdhara, Śūlavarāyudha, Śveta, q.v. Devaśreṣṭha, Devadeva, Deva deveśvara, Devādhideva, Deveśa, q.v. Ekaśṛṅga, q.v. Govinda, v. Kṛṣṇa. Guhya, q.v. Hari, . Harimedhas, Havyakavyabhuj, Hayaśiras, Hayaśirodhara, Hayamukha, q.v. Hṛṣīkeśa, v. Kṛṣṇa. Iśāna, Īśvara, q.v. Indrānuja, . Indrāvaraja, . Jagannātha, Jagatpati, Jagatprabhu, q.v. Janārdana, v. Kṛṣṇa. Jiṣṇu, Kapardin, Kapila, q.v. Keśava, v. Kṛṣṇa. Kṣetrajña, q.v. Lokakartṛ, q.v. Madhuhan, Madhukaiṭabhahan, Madhu nihan, Madhusūdana, Madhunisūdana, q.v. Mahābhūtādhipati, Mahādeva, Mahāpu ruṣa, Mahāvarāha, Maheśvara, q.v. Mahendrāvaraja, . Mrñjakeśa, Muñjakeśavat, Muñjakeśin, q.v. Niṣkriya, q.v. Padmalocana, Padmanābha, q.v. Paramātman, Parameśvara, Parameṣṭhin, q.v. Pītavāsas, v. Kṛṣṇa. Prabhu, Prajāpati, Prajāpatipati, Puṇḍa rīkākṣa, Puruṣa, Puruṣavara, Puruṣot tama, Puṣkarākṣa, Puṣkarekṣaṇa, q.v. Rathacakrabhṛt, q.v. Sādhya, Sahasraśirasa, Sahasraśīrṣa, Sahasrākṣa, Sarvabhūtapitāmaha, Sarva bhūteśvara, Sarvadeveśa, Sarvalokeśvara, Siṃha, Suraśreṣṭha, Suraganaśreṣṭha, Suraguru, Surapati, Surārighna, Surāsura guru, Suravarottama, Sureśa, Svayambhū, q.v. Tribhuvanaśreṣṭha, Tribhuvaneśvara, q.v. Tridaśavarāvaraja, . Trilokeśa, Trilokeśvara, Trivartman, Trivikrama, Trivikramagati, q.v. Upendra, Urukrama, q.v. Vaikuṇtha, Vāmana, Varada, Varāha, Vārāha, Vareṇya, q.v. Vāsavānantaraja, . Vāsavānuja, . Vāsavāvaraja, . Vibhu, Vibudhaśreṣṭha, Viśva, Viśvabhū, Viśvabhuj, Viśvagupta, Viśvakarman, Viśvakṛt, Viśvamūrti, Viśvapara, Viśva rūpa, Viśvarūpadhṛk, Viśvātman, Viśveśa, Viśveśvara, Virāj, Viriñca, Vikuṇṭha, Viṣvaksena, q.v. Yajñapati, Yogeśvara, Yogīśa, Yogīśvara, Yogin, q.v. Viṣṇus names . The names are the following, alphabetically arranged Abhiprāya, Acala, Acintya, Acyuta, Aśoka, Āśrama, Aśvattha, Adbhuta, Ādhāranilaya, Adhiṣṭhāna, Adhokṣaja, Adhṛta, Ādideva, Āditya, Adṛśya, Agrāhya, Agraja, Agraṇī, Ahar, Aja, Akrūra, Akṣara, Akṣara, Akṣobhya, Amānin, Amaraprabhu, Ambhonidhi, Ameyātman, Amitāśana, Amitavikrama, Amogha, Amṛta, Amṛtāśa, Amṛtāṃśūdbhava, Amṛtapa, Amṛtavapus, Amṛtyu, Amūrti, Amūrtimat, Anādi, Anādi nidhana, Anagha, Anala, Anāmaya, Ānanda, Ananta, Anantaśrī, Anantajit, Anantarūpa, Anantātman, Anartha, Anekamūrti, Anīśa, Anila, Animiṣa, Anirdeśyavapus, Aniruddha, Anirviṇṇa, Anivartin, Anna, Annāda, Antaka, Aṇu, Anukūla, Anuttama, Apāṃ nidhi, Aparājita, Apramatta, Aprameya, Aprameyātman, Apratiratha, Araudra, Aravindākṣa, Arciṣmat, Arcita, Arha, Arka, Artha, Asaṅkhyeya, Asat, Atīndra, Atīndriya, Ātmayoni, Ātmavat, Atula, Auṣadha, Āvartana, Avijñātṛ, Avyakta, Avyaktarūpa, Avyaṅga, Avyaya, Ayonija, Babhru, Bahuśiras, Bhagahan, Bhagavat, Bhakta vatsala, Bhānu, Bhārabhṛt, Bhartṛ, Bhāskaradyuti, Bhāva, Bhāvana, Bhayāpaha, Bhayakṛt, Bhayanāśana, Bheṣaja, Bhīma, Bhīmaparā krama, Bhiṣaj, Bhojana, Bhoktṛ, Bhrājiṣṇu, Bhū, Bhūśaya, Bhūgarbha, Bhujagottama, Bhūridakṣiṇa, Bhūṣaṇa, Bhūtabhāvana, Bhūtabhavyabhavannātha, Bhūta bhavyabhavatprabhu, Bhūtabhṛt, Bhūtādi, Bhūtakṛt, Bhūtamaheśvara, Bhūtātman, Bhūtāvāsa, Bhūti, Bhuvas, Bīja avyaya, Brahmajña, Brahmakṛt, Brahmán, Bráhman, Brāhmaṇa, Brāhmaṇapriya, Brahmaṇya, Brahmavid, Brahmavivardhana, Brahmin, Bṛhadbhānu, Bṛhadrūpa, Bṛhat, Cakragadā dhara, Cakrin, Cala, Canda nāṅgadin, Candrāṃśu, Cāṇūrāndhraniṣūdana, Caturasra, Caturātman, Caturbāhu, Caturbhāva, Caturbhuja, Caturdaṃṣṭra, Caturgati, Caturmūrti, Caturvedavid, Caturvyūha, Chinnasaṃśaya, Śabdasaha, Śabdātiga, Śaśabindu, Śāśvata, Śaktimatāṃ śreṣṭha, Śama, Śambhu, Śaṅkhabhṛt, Śānta, Śānti, Śāntida, Śarabha, Śaraṇa, Śarīrabhṛt, Śarīrabhūtabhṛt, Śarman, Śārṅgadhanvan, Śarva, Śarvarīkara, Śāstṛ, Śatamūrti, Śatānana, Śatānanda, Śatāvarta, Śatrughna, Śatrujit, Śatrutāpana, Śauri, Śiśira, Śikhaṇḍin, Śipiviṣṭa, Śiṣṭakṛt, Śiṣṭeṣṭa, Śiva, Śokanāśana, Śramaṇa, Śreṣṭha, Śreyas, Śrīśa, Śrīda, Śrīdhara, Śrīgarbha, Śrīkara, Śrīmat, Śrīmatāṃ vara, Śrīnidhi, Śrīnivāsa, Śrīpati, Śrīvāsa, Śrīvatsavakṣas, Śrīvibhāvana, Śrutisāgara, Śṛṅgin, Śubhāṅga, Śubhekṣaṇa, Śuci, Śucisravas, Śūnya, Śūra, Śūrajaneśvara, Śūrasena, Daśārha, Daivakīnandana, v. Devakīnandana Dakṣa, Dakṣiṇa, Dama, Damana, Damayitṛ, Dāmodara, Daṇḍa, Darpada, Darpahan, Dāruṇa, Deva, Devabhṛt, Devakīnandana, Deveśa, Dhāman, Dhanañjaya, Dhaneśvara, Dhanurdhara, Dhanurveda, Dhanvin, Dhanya, Dharādhara, Dharaṇīdhara, Dharma, Dharmādhyakṣa, Dharmagup, Dharmakṛt, Dharmaviduttama, Dharmayūpa, Dharmin, Dhātṛ, Dhātur uttamaḥ, Dhruva, Dhṛtāśis, Dhṛtātman, Dhūrya, Diśaḥ, Dīptamūrti, Divaspṛś, Draviṇaprada, Dṛḍha, Dṛpta, Duḥsvapna nāśana, Durādharṣa, Durārihan, Duratikrama, Durāvāsa, Durdhara, Durga, Durgama, Durjaya, Durlabha, Durmarṣaṇa, Duṣkṛtihan, Dyutidhara, Eka, Ekapad, Ekātman, Gabhastinemi, Gabhīra, Gabhīrātman, Gadādhara, Gadāgraja, Gahana, Gaṇeśvara, Garuḍa dhvaja, Gatisattama, Gohita, Gopati, Goptṛ, Govidāṃ pati, Govinda, Grāmaṇī, Guha, Guhya, Guṇabhṛt, Gupta, Guru, Gurutama, Halāyudha, Haṃsa, Hari, Havis, Hemāṅga, Hetu, Hiraṇyagarbha, Hiraṇyanābha, Hṛṣīkeśa, Hutabhuj, Īśāna, Īśvara, Īśvareśvara, Ijya, Indrakarman, Iṣṭa, Jagadādija, Jagannātha, Jagataḥ setu, Jahnu, Janajanmādi, Janana, Janārdana, Janeśvara, Janmamṛtyujarātiga, Jaya, Jayanta, Jayin, Jetṛ, Jita, Jitakrodha, Jitamanyu, Jitāmitra, Jīva, Jīvana, Jñānagamya, Jñāna uttama, Jyeṣṭha, Jyotis, Ka, Kāla, Kālanemihan, Kāma, Kāmadeva, Kāmahan, Kāmakṛt, Kāmapāla, Kāmaprada, Kāmin, Kanakāṅgadin, Kānta, Kapi, Kapīndra, Kapila, Kapilācārya, Karaṇa, Kāraṇa, Kartṛ, Kathita, Kavi, Keśava, Keśihan, Khaṇḍaparaśu, Ki, Krama, Kratu, Krodhahan, Krodhakṛt, Kṛśa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛtāgama, Kṛtajña, Kṛtakarman, Kṛtākṛta, Kṛtalakṣaṇa Kṛtāntakṛt, Kṛti, Kṣama, Kṣāma, Kṣamināṃ vara, Kṣara, Kṣemakṛt, Kṣetrajña, Kṣitīśa, Kṣobhaṇa, Kumbha, Kumuda, Kuṇḍa, Kuṇḍalin, Kuṇḍara, Kuvaleśaya, Lakṣmī, Lakṣmīvat, Lohitākṣa, Lokabandhu, Lokādhyakṣa, Lokādhiṣṭhāna, Lokanātha, Lokasā raṅga, Lokasvāmin, Lokatrayāśraya, Mādhava, Madhu, Madhusūdana, Mahābala, Mahābhāga, Mahābhoga, Mahābhūta, Mahābuddhi, Mahāśakti, Mahāśana, Mahāśṛṅga, Mahādeva, Mahādhana, Mahādridhṛk, Mahādyuti, Mahāgarta, Mahāhavis, Mahāhrada, Mahākarman, Mahākośa, Mahākrama, Mahākratu, Mahākṣa, Mahāmakha, Mahāmanas, Mahāmāya, Mahāmūrti, Mahānidhi, Maharddhi, Mahārha, Maharṣi, Mahāsvana, Mahat, Mahātapas, Mahātejas, Mahāvarāha, Mahāvīrya, Mahāyajña, Mahāyajvan, Mahejya, Mahendra, Maheṣvāsa, Mahībhartṛ, Mahīdhara, Mahodadhiśaya, Mahoraga, Mahotsāha, Mānada, Maṅgala, Manohara, Manojava, Mantra, Manu, Mānya, Mārga, Marīci, Medhaja, Medhas, Medhāvin, Medinīpati, Muktānāṃ paramā gati, Mukunda, Nahuṣa, Naika, Naikaśṛṅga, Naikaja, Naikakarmakṛt, Naikamāya, Naikarūpa, Naikātman, Nakṣatranemi, Nakṣatrin, Nanda, Nandakin, Nandana, Nandi, Nandin, Nara, Narasiṃhavapus, Nārāyaṇa, Naya, Netṛ, Neya, Nidhi, Nigraha, Nimiṣa, Nirguṇa, Nirvāṇa, Niṣṭhā, Nivṛttātman, Niyama, Niyantṛ, Nyagrodha, Nyāya, Ojas, Pada anuttama, Padma garbha, Padmanābha, Padmani bhekṣaṇa, Padmin, Paṇa, Pāpanāśana, Para, Paramaspaṣṭa, Paramātman, Parameśvara, Parameṣṭhin, Pararddhi, Parāyaṇa, Parigraha, Parjanya, Paryavasthita, Pavana, Pāvana, Pavitra, Peśala, Pitṛ, Prabhava, Prabhu, Prabhūta, Pradhānapuruṣeśvara, Pradyumna, Pragraha, Prāgvaṃśa, Prajābhava, Prajāgara, Prajāpati, Prakāśana, Prakāśātman, Pramāṇa, Prāṃśu, Pramodana, Prāṇa, Prāṇabhṛt, Prāṇada, Prāṇajīvana, Prāṇanilaya, Praṇava, Prapitāmaha, Prasannātman, Pratāpana, Pratardana, Prathita, Prathu, Pratiṣṭhita, Pratyaya, Prītivardhana, Priyakṛt, Priyārha, Pṛthu, v. Prathu Punarvasu, Puṇḍarīkākṣa, Puṇya, Puṇyaśravaṇakīrtana, Puṇya kīrti, Purandara, Purātana, Pūrayitṛ, Pūrṇa, Purujit, Purusattama, Puruṣa, Puruṣottama, Puṣkarākṣa, Puṣpahāsa, Puṣṭa, Pūtātman, Rakṣaṇa, Rāma, Raṇapriya, Rathāṅgapriya, Ratnagarbha, Ratnanābha, Ravi, Ravilocana, Rohita, Rucirāṅgada, Rudra, Ṛddha, Ṛtu, Sadāmarṣin, Sadāyogin, Sadbhūti, Sadgati, Sādhu, Saha, Sahas rajit, Sahasrākṣa, Sahasrāṃśu, Sahasramūrdhan, Sahasrapad, Sahasrārcis, Sahiṣṇu, Sākṣin, Sama, Sāmaga, Sāmagāyana, Sāman, Samātman, Samāvarta, Samayajña, Sambhava, Samīhana, Samīraṇa, Samitiñjaya, Sammita, Saṃnyāsakṛt, Sampratardana, Saṃsthāna, Saṃvartaka, Saṃvatsara, Saṃvṛta, Sanāt sanātanatama, Sandhātṛ, Sandhimat, Saṅgraha, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Saṅkṣeptṛ, Sannivāsa, Saptaidhas, Saptajihva, Saptavāhana, Sarga, Sarva, Sarvaśastrabhṛtāṃ vara, Sarvadarśana, Sarvadarśin, Sarvādi, Sarvadṛś, Sarvaga, Sarvajña, Sarvakāmada, Sarvalakṣaṇalakṣaṇya, Sarvapraharaṇāyudha, Sarvasaha, Sarvāsunilaya, Sarvataścakṣus, Sarvatomukha, Sarvavāc, Sarvavid, Sarvayogaviniḥsṛta, Sarveśvara, Sat, Satāṃ gati, Satkartṛ, Satkīrti, Satkṛta, Satkṛti, Satparāyaṇa, Satpathācāra, Sattā, Sattra, Sattvastha, Sattvavat, Sāttvika, Sātvatāṃ pati, Satya, Satyadharman, Satyadharmaparākrama, Satya dharmaparāyaṇa, Satyamedhas, Satyaparā krama, Satyasandha, Sava, Savitṛ, Siddha, Siddhārtha, Siddhasaṅkalpa, Siddhi, Siddhida, Siddhisādhana, Siṃha, Skanda, Skandadhara, Soma, Somapa, Spaṣṭākṣara, Sragvin, Sraṣṭr, Stavapriya, Stavya, Sthānada, Sthāṇu, Sthāvara, Sthavira, Sthaviṣṭha, Sthira, Sthūla, Stotra, Stotṛ, Stuti, Subhuja, Sudarśana, Sudhanvan, Sughoṣa, Suhṛd, Sukhada, Sūkṣma, Sulabha, Sulocana, Sumedhas, Sumukha, Sunda, Sundara, Suparṇa, Suprasāda, Surādhyakṣa, Surānanda, Surārihan, Sureśa, Sureśvara, Suruci, Sūrya, Suṣeṇa, Sutantu, Sutapas, Suvarṇabindu, Suvarṇavarṇa, Suvīra, Suvrata, Suyāmuna, Svābhāvya, Svadhṛta, Svakṣa, Svaṅga, Svāṅga, Svāpana, Svar, Svasti, Svastibhuj, Svastida, Svastidakṣiṇa, Svastikṛt, Svāsya, Svavaśa, Svayambhū, Svayañjāta, Tad, Tantavardhana, Tāra, Tāraṇa, Taru, Tattva, Tattvavid, Tejas, Tīrthakara, Tridaśādhyakṣa, Trikakud, Trilokadhṛk, Trilokātman, Trilokeśa, Tripada, Trisāman, Trivikrama, Tuṣṭa, Tvaṣtṛ, Udāradhī, Udbhava, Udīrṇa, Udumbara, Ugra, Upendra, Ūrdhvaga, Ūrjita, Ūrjitaśāsana, Uttara, Uttāraṇa, Vācaspati, Vāgmin, Vahni, Vaidya, Vaikhāna, Vaikuṇṭha, Vājasana, Vāmana, Vaṃśavardhana, Vanamālin, Varāṅga, Varada, Varāroha, Vardhamāna, Vardhana, Varuṇa, Vāruṇa, Vāsavānuja, Vaṣaṭkāra, Vasu, Vasuda, Vāsudera, Vasumanas, Vasuprada, Vasuretas, Vatsala, Vatsara, Vatsin, Vāyu, Vāyuvāhana, Veda, Vedāṅga, Vedavid, Vedhas, Vedya, Vegavat, Vibhu, Viśiṣṭa, Viśodhana, Viśoka, Viśrāma, Viśrutātman, Viśuddhātman, Viśva, Viśvabāhu, Viśvabhuj, Viśvadakṣiṇa, Viśvadṛś, Viśvakarman, Viśvamūrti, Viśvaretas, Viśvātman, Viśvayoni, Vidāraṇa, Vidhātṛ, Vidheyātman, Vidiśaḥ, Vidvattama, Vihāyasagati, Vijaya, Vijitātman, Vikartṛ, Vikrama, Vikramin, Vikṣara, Vimuktātman, Vinayitṛ, Vīra, Vīrabāhu, Vīrahan, Viraja, Virāma, Virocana, Viṣama, Viṣṇu, Viṣvaksena, Vistāra, Vītabhaya, Vivikta, Vṛddhātman, Vṛkṣa, Vṛṣa, Vṛṣabha, Vṛṣabhākṣa, Vṛṣāhin, Vṛṣākapi, Vṛṣakarman, Vṛṣākṛti, Vṛṣaparvan, Vṛṣapriya, Vṛṣodara, Vyādiśaḥ, Vyagra, Vyāla, Vyāpin, Vyāpta, Vyāsa, Vyavasāya, Vyavasthāna, Yad, Yaduśreṣṭha, Yajña, Yajñabhṛt, Yajñabhuj, Yajñaguhya, Yajñakṛt, Yajñāṅga, Yajñāntakṛt, Yajñapati, Yajñasādhana, Yajñavāhana, Yajñin, Yajvan, Yama, Yoga, Yogavidāṃ netṛ, Yogin, Yogīśa, Yugādikṛt, Yugāvarta, .
Viṣṇu2, name of a fire . Aṅgiras6.
Viṣṇu3 = Sūrya, Do. = Śiva .
Viṣṇudharman, a Suparṇa, son of Garuḍa .
Viṣṇuloka . c, .
Viṣṇupada, name of several places . b, .
Viṣṇupadī = Gaṅgā, .
Viṣṇuparvan, a section of Harivaṃśa .
Viṣṇuprasādita = Śiva .
Viṣṇuyaśas = Kalkin, .
Viṣṭaraśravas = Kṛṣṇa, .
Viṣvagaśva1, one or more ancient kings .
Viṣvagaśva2, a king in the time of Yudhi ṣṭhira .
Viṣvaksena1, a ṛṣi .
Viṣvaksena2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Viṣvaksena3, an ancient king .
Viṣvaksena4 = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Śiva .
Viskara, an ancient king . b, .
Vistara = Śiva .
Vistāra1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vītabhaya = Viṣṇu .
Viṭabhūta, an Asura .
Vītahavya, a king . b, .
Vītahavya, pl a tribe or family . b, . Haihaya, pl.
. b . Bhīṣma said While Manu, in days of yore, was righteously ruling his subjects, he obtained a righteous son Śaryāti, in whose race were born Vatsas sons, the kings Haihaya and Tālajaṅgha. Haihaya had wives and heroic sons, who all studied the Vedas and Dhanurveda. In Kāśi was king Haryaśva, the grandfather of Divodāsa. The sons of king Haihaya invaded Kāśi and slew king Haryaśva in a battle between the Gaṅgā and the Yamunā, and then went back to their own delightful city in the Vatsa country. Meanwhile Haryaśvas son Sudeva was installed as Kāśi king. The sons of Vītahavya once more came and defeated him in battle, and then returned to their own city. After this, Sudevas son Divodāsa became installed as Kāśi king at the command of Indra he built the city of Vārāṇasī between the Gaṅgā and the southern bank of the Gomatī. The Haihayas again attacked Divodāsa he fought for, days, lost his army, left his capital, and fled away to the retreat of Bharadvāja, who was his priest, and performed a sacrifice, in consequence of which Pratardana was born to him. On the same day when Pratardana was born, he grew as great as a boy of years, and mastered the Vedas and Dhanurveda, Bharadvāja having entered into the prince and caused all the energy of the universe to enter his body . Divodāsa installed Pratardana as yuvarāja and ordered him to march against the sons of Vītahavya. Pratardana speedily crossed the Gaṅgā and proceeded against the city of the Vītahavyas and slew them all. King Vītahavya fled away to the retreat of Bhṛgu. Pratardana followed in his footsteps and ordered Bhṛgu to surrender king Vītahavya. Bhṛgu said there is no kṣatriya in this retreat they who are here are all brahmans. Pratardana returned home, and Vītahavya became a Br ṛ. in consequence of Bhṛgus statement. Vītahavya Gṛtsamada Sutejas Varcas Vihavya Vitatya Satya Santa Ṛ. Śravas Tamas Prakāśa Vāgindra Pramati Rura Śunaka Śaunaka .
Vītahotra, pl v. Vītihotra, pl.
Vitarka, son of the elder Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Vitastā, a river . b, . b, .
Vitatya, a brahman, son of Vihavya. b, .
Vīti, name of a fire .
Vītihotra, an ancient king .
Vītihotra, pl a people .
Vittadā, a mātṛ. u, .
Vittagoptṛ, Vittānāṃ patiḥ, Vittapati, Vitteśa = Kubera, q.v.
Vitula, a Sauvīra prince .
Vivaha, name of a wind. l The fifth wind is fraught with great force and speed, and is dry, and uproots and breaks n the trees. It causes calamitous phenomena of many kinds, and produces roaring sounds in the firmament. It is known by the name of .
Vivardhana, a king .
Vivasvat1, one of the Ādityas, identical with Sūrya . b, . u, . b, to dvitīyajanmany aṇḍasaṃjñitasya Mārtaṇḍo ān Śrāddhadevaḥ, son of Aditi and born from an eggMārtaṇḍasya, father of the Aśvins who came out of the nostrils of his wife Sañjñā
Vivasvat2 a Daitya .
Vivasvat3, a Viśvadeva .
Vivasvat4 = Śiva .
Vivikta = Viṣṇu .
Viviṃśa1, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Viviṃśa2, a prince, son of Viṃśa. b, .
Viviṃśati, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Viviṃśu, a Kuru warrior .
Vivindhya, a Dānava, follower of Śālva . Dānava.
Vivitsu, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . .
Vomavaktra, v. Somavaktra.
Vrajana, son of Ajamīḍha .
Vrajanātha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vratādhipa = Śiva .
Vratāvāsa = Mahāpuruṣa .
Vratavat = Śiva, .
Vrateśa = Śiva, .
Vratin = Śiva, .
vrātya, pl. and sg .
Vrīhidrauṇikaākhyāna .
. . Dwelling in the woods, the Pāṇḍavas spent eleven years in a miserable plight, Yudhiṣṭhira repenting of his act of gambling, and the others thinking of revenge. Once Vyāsa came to them and spoke to Yudhiṣṭhira about the meritoriousness of asceticism, saying that a wise man, knowing that life has its ups and ns, is neither filled with joy nor with grief, while foolish persons are reborn as beasts in after life nothing in this world is more difficult to practise than charity, and therefore charity is superior to everything even a small gift may be of great result in future life, provided that what is given away is properly acquired and, with a pure mind and in due time, bestowed on pious persons but the bestowal of ill gotten gains can never rescue the giver from evil . Mudgala
Vṛddha = Śiva .
Vṛddhaśarman, a prince .
Vṛddhagārgya, a ṛṣi . Gārgya.
Vṛddhakanyā . u The ṛṣi Kuṇi Garga by penances created a fair daughter from his mind and then went to heaven. She worshipped the Pitṛs and the gods with fasts and practised penances in that solitary forest not wishing to marry, as she did not see a husband worthy of her. When she could no longer move, she set her heart upon departing for the other world. Nārada told her that she had no regions of blessedness to obtain, not having cleansed herself by the rite of marriage. She then went to a concourse of ṛṣis, and said that she would give half her penances to him who would accept her hand in marriage. Gālavas son, the ṛṣi Prākśṛṅgavat, accepted her hand on condition that he should live with her only one night. On that night she became a young lady of the finest complexion, etc and Gālavas son became very happy. At morn she said he that will, with rapt attention, pass one night in this tīrtha after having gratified the gods with oblations of water, shall obtain the merit of the vow of brahmacarya for years, and then she departed for heaven. He soon followed her, moved by sorrow, .
Vṛddhakṣatra1, king of the Sindhus, father of Jayadratha . g . was the father of the Sindhu king Jayadratha, at whose birth an incorporeal voice said that he would become one of the foremost of kṣatriyas, but in a battle some conspicuous kṣatriya would cut off his head. The Sindhu king . then summoned all his kinsmen and pronounced the curse, that he who would cause the head of Jayadratha to fall to the earth, the head of that man would crack into pieces. Then he installed Jayadratha on the throne, and, repairing to the woods, devoted himself to ascetic austerities, . Bṛhatkṣatra3, Saindhava, Sindhupati. Do a Paurava prince, v. Bṛhatkṣatra4 .
Vṛddhātman = Viṣṇu .
Vṛddhikā, pl a class of female ogres . the reading Vṛkṣakā, Hopkins Epic. Mythol p. .
Vṛhaka, Vṛhattvan, names of Gandharvas. b, .
Vṛjinīvat, a prince. b, .
Vṛka1, a prince .
Vṛka2, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Vṛka3, a Kuru warrior ʹ, .
Vṛka4, an ancient king .
Vṛka, pl a people .
Vṛkaratha, brother of Karṇa .
Vṛkasthala, a village .
Vṛkodara = Bhīma Pāṇḍava, q.v.
Vṛkodara, pl. a class of demons. u, .
Vṛkṣa1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
vṛkṣa, pl .
Vṛkṣākāra, Vṛkṣakarṇasthiti, Vṛkṣaketu = Śiva .
Vṛkṣāṇāṃ kandadaḥ = Śiva .
Vṛkṣāṇāṃ pati = Śiva, .
Vṛkṣāraka, v. Vṛndāraka
Vṛkṣavāsin, a Yakṣa, .
Vṛṃhilā, v. Bṛṃhitā.
Vṛndāraka, a son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
Vṛṣa1 = Karṇa, q.v.
Vṛṣa2, a Kuru warrior .
Vṛṣa3, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Vṛṣa4, an Asura. b, .
Vṛṣa5 = Śiva, .
Vṛṣa6 = Dharma, .
Vṛṣa7 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣabha1, a mountain near Girivraja .
Vṛṣabha2, a Gāndhāra prince, brother of Śakuni .
Vṛṣabha3 = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣabhā, a river .
Vṛṣabhadhvaja = Śiva, q.v.
Vṛṣabhākṣa = Viṣṇu .
Vṛṣabhāṅka, Vṛṣabhavāhana = Śiva, q.v.
Vṛṣabhekṣaṇa, Vṛṣabhodāra = Śiva, .
Vṛṣabhūta, Vṛṣacara = Śiva, .
Vṛṣaśṛṅga = Śiva, .
Vṛṣadaṃśa, a mountain .
Vṛṣadarbha1, name of a king . b, .
Vṛṣadarbha2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣādarbhi, name of a king . b, . Śaibya, Śibisūnu.
Vṛṣadarpa = Śiva, .
Vṛṣadgu, an ancient king .
Vṛṣadhvaja1, a king .
Vṛṣadhvaja2 = Śiva, q.v.
Vṛṣāhin = Viṣṇu .
Vṛṣaka1, a Gandhāra prince, son of Subala, brother of Acala and Śakuni, and brother in law of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, . Gāndhāra, dual, Gāndhāramukhya, dual.
Vṛṣaka2, a prince, brother of Kaliṅga2 .
Vṛṣakāhvayā, a river .
Vṛṣākapi1, a ṛṣi .
Vṛṣākapi2, one of the eleven Rudras .
Vṛṣākapi3 = Śiva, . Do. = Indra, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Sūrya, .
Vṛṣakarman = Viṣṇu .
Vṛṣaketana = Śiva, q.v.
Vṛṣakrātha, v. Vṛṣa2.
Vṛṣākṛti = Viṣṇu .
Vṛṣāmitra, a brahman .
Vṛṣaṇa = Śiva .
Vṛṣanābha = Śiva, .
Vṛṣāṇḍa, an Asura. b, .
Vṛṣāṅka = Śiva, q.v.
Vṛṣaparvan1, a rājarṣi .
Vṛṣaparvan2, an Asura chief . b, . Asura, Daitya, Dānavendra.
Vṛṣaparvan3 = Viṣṇu .
Vṛṣapati = Śiva, .
Vṛṣapriya = Viṣṇu .
Vṛṣarṣabha = Śiva, .
Vṛṣarūpa = Śiva .
Vṛṣasāhvayā, a river .
Vṛṣasena1, an ancient king .
Vṛṣasena2, a prince .
Vṛṣasena3, son of Karṇa ʹ, . Karṇaputra, Karṇasuta, Karṇātmaja, Kārṇi.
Vṛṣaskandha = Śiva .
Vṛṣavāhana = Śiva, q.v.
Vṛṣavarman, a Kuru warrior .
Vṛṣāvarta = Śiva, .
Vṛṣāyudha = Śiva, .
Vṛṣṇi, pl a people . b, . c, . d, . b, . Vārṣṇeya, pl.
Vṛṣṇi1, sg. = Kṛtavarman, . Do. = Sātyaki, .
Vṛṣṇi3 = Śiva, .
Vṛṣṇiśārdūla1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣṇiśārdūla2 = Sātyaki, .
Vṛṣṇiśreṣṭha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣṇikulaśreṣṭha =, .
Vṛṣṇikulodvaha1 = Śāmba, .
Vṛṣṇikulodvaha2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣṇikulodvaha3 = Sātyaki, .
Vṛṣṇinandana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣṇipati = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣṇipravara1 = Balarāma, .
Vṛṣṇipravara2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣṇipravīra1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣṇipravīra2 = Pradyumna, .
Vṛṣṇipravīra3 = Sātyaki, .
Vṛṣṇipuṅgava1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣṇipuṅgava2 = Sātyaki, .
Vṛṣṇipura = Dvārakā, .
Vṛṣṇisattama = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣṇisiṃha = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Sātyaki, .
Vṛṣṇisiṃha, dual = Sātyaki and Kṛtavarman, .
Vṛṣṇivara = Sātyaki, .
Vṛṣṇivīra1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣṇivīra2 = Sātyaki, .
Vṛṣṇivīra, dual = Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, .
Vṛṣṇy Andhakapati1 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Ugrasena, .
Vṛṣṇy Andhakapravīra = Sātyaki, .
Vṛṣṇy Andhakapura = Dvārakā, .
Vṛṣṇy Andhakavyāghra = Sātyaki, .
Vṛṣṇy Andhakottama = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vṛṣodara = Viṣṇu .
Vṛṣya = Śiva .
Vṛtra, an Asura, slain by Indra . c Formerly the Asura . had defeated the gods headed by Indra they then applied to Brahmán, who applied to Viṣṇu, who said that Tvaṣṭṛ, in days of yore, had performed ascetic penances for a million of years, and that he had created . with the permission of Maheśvara you go to Śiva on the Mandara mountain. So they did, and Śiva gave to Indra his armour cased in which Indra slew . u, . b, . b, . b, Tvāṣṭrotpāditaṃ, the slaughter of . narrated in accordance with Gautamī lubdhaka vyāla Mṛtyu Kālasaṃv.ṃ hatvā DevarāṭSaṃvartta Maruttīyatridivaṃ prāg jahāraAśvamedhikap.colour and formtouchsoundmohaIndrasya saha eṇa yuddhaṃAnugītāp.eṇeva Śatakratoḥ, sc. yuddhaṃ
b . Bhīṣma said In days of yore, Indra, accom panied by the celestial forces, proceeded in his chariot, and beheld As Vṛtra, stationed before him like a mountain, yojanas in height and in circumference. Indra was struck with palsy in the lower extremities. On the eve of that great battle between . and As. there arose loud shouts from both sides, etc. Vṛtra felt neither awe nor fear. Then the encounter commenced the entire welkin was enveloped by the combatants of both sides all the gods with Brahmán, and Ṛ Si G and Aps. on their chariots had assembled in order to see the battle. Vṛtra shot rocks, the gods arrows Vṛtra employed illusion Indra was stupefied Vasiṣṭha restored him to his senses by the Rathantara, pointing out to him Brahmán, etc. . Indra, by yoga, dispelled the illusions of Vṛtra. Bṛhaspati and Ṛ. repaired to Śiva, whose energy became a fever and penetrated Vṛtra Viṣṇu entered the thunderbolt of Indra Bṛhaspati, Vasiṣṭha, and Ṛ. urged Indra to slay Vṛtra, and so did Śiva, saying that Vṛtra was the soul of the universe, capable of going everywhere for, years Vṛtra had practised penances in order to obtain strength Brahmán had given him the boons he had solicited the greatness of yogins, large powers of illusions, excess of might, etc. Śiva told Indra to slay him with yoga, and imparted to him his own energy. . and Ṛ. uttered loud cheers, etc. Suddenly all As. were afflicted with the loss of memory in a trice their powers of illusion also disappeared. Ṛ. and . praised Śakra and Śiva . Description of the symptoms that appeared on the body of Vṛtra when he was overtaken by that fever His memory issued out of his mouth in form of a dreadful jackal. Inauspicious omens. Indra looked hard at him Vṛtra yawned and uttered superhuman cries while Vṛtra was yawning Indra hurled his thunderbolt at him and slew him then Indra entered heaven with that thunderbolt pervaded by Viṣṇu. Then Brahmavadhyā issued out of the body of the slain Vṛtra. A little while after, when Indra was proceeding towards heaven, she seized him and stuck to him. Indra entered the fibres of a lotus stalk and dwelt there for many years. But Brahmavadhyā pursued him closely, and deprived him of all his energy. At last he repaired to Brahmán, who made her leave Indra by apportioning one quarter to Agni one quarter to the trees, herbs, and all kinds of grass one quarter to the Apsarases and one quarter to the waters . With Brahmáns permission Indra then performed a horse sacrifice and thereby became cleansed, regained his prosperity, and slew thousands of foes. From the blood of Vṛtra were born the śikhaṇḍāḥ, which, for this reason, must not be eaten by the twice born classes, etc. Blessing upon the reciter .
Vṛtta1, a serpent . Avṛtta.
Vṛtta2, v. Vṛtra.
Vṛttasaṃvartaka, v. Vṛtta1.
Vṛtti = Nīti, .
Vṛttāvṛttakara = Śiva .
Vudvudā, v. Budbudā.
Vyaśva, name of two ancient kings .
Vyādha1 = Dharma vyādha, . Do. = Śiva, .
Vyādhi, pl. . Do. = Śiva .
Vyādhi, sg Vyādhihan, Vyādhīnām āgamaḥ = Śiva .
Vyādiśaḥ = Viṣṇu .
Vyāghra = Śiva .
vyāghra, pl. .
Vyāghradatta1, one or more Pāṇḍava warriors . Pāñcālya.
Vyāghradatta2, a Kuru warrior .
Vyāghraketu, a Pāñśāla prince .
Vyāghrākṣa, a warrior of Skanda. u, .
Vyāghrapāda, a ṛṣi. g, .
Vyagra = Viṣṇu .
vyākaraṇa, .
Vyākaraṇottara, Vyakta = Śiva .
Vyaktastha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Vyaktāvyakta = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva
Vyaktāvyaktakara = Viṣṇu, .
Vyāla = Viṣṇu .
Vyālarūpa = Śiva .
Vyālayajñopavītin = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Śiva .
Vyāna1, one of the vital breaths . b, . b, . g, . b, . g, .
Vyāna2 = Śiva .
Vyāpin, Vyāpta = Viṣṇu .
Vyāsa, a ṛṣi, the supposed compiler of Mhbhr son of Parāśara and Satyavatī, father of Śuka, and, with the wives of Vicitravīrya, of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Pāṇḍu, and Vidura his proper name is Kṛṣṇa, and on account of his being born on an island he is called Dvaipāyana and Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana he arranged the Vedas, . Parvasaṅgr.etat parvaśataṃ pūrṇaṃ enoktaṃ, para marṣiṇā etad aṣṭādaśam parva proktaṃ ena Āstīkap Jaratkāru śiṣyo sya, sc. LomaharṣaṇaSarpasattraputraśiṣyasahāyavān, among the sadasyas at the snake sacrifice of Janamejaya, Ādivaṃśāvatāraṇap.kathā sampannāḥakathayac citram ākhyānaṃ Bhārataṃ, at the snake sacrifice of Janamejaya . caused his disciple Vaiśampāyana to recite the Mhbhr.mataṃ...syaPage7 b mataṃ...sya, Ādivaṃśāvatāraṇadvīpavivyāsa, etymology, c, Duṣyantagranthasamāśritaiḥ, sc. dvijaiḥ, Pārāśaryaḥ, .K. .Viduraḥ Kṛṣṇa DvaipāyanātmajaḥK. ..DhṛtarāṣṭravivāhaK..K. .PāṇḍuK. .
Vyāsa2 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vyāsaśiṣya = Vaiśampāvana, .
Vyāsasthalī, name of a sacred place .
Vyāsātmaja = Śuka, .
Vyāsavana, name of a sacred forest .
Vyavasāya1 . u, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Vyavasthāna = Viṣṇu .
Vyaya, name of a serpent .
Vyomagaṅgā .
Vyomakeśa = Śiva, .
Vyoman = Mahāpuruṣa .
Vyomāri, a Viśvadeva .
Vyūka, pl a people .
Vyūḍhoraska, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra . next.
Vyūḍhoru, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra .
vyūhaśāstra, .
Vyuṣitāśva, an ancient king, descendant of Pūru. b There was a king named Vyuṣitāśva, of the race of Pūru once, when he sacrificed, the gods, with Indra and Devarṣis, came there, and the gods and the Brahmarṣis began themselves to perform a sacrifice having subdued the eastern, northern, western, and southern princes, he performed a horse sacrifice, etc. The wife of . was Bhadrā Kākṣīvatī, whom he loved so much that he was attacked by phthisis and died sonless Bhadrā could not bear separation from him and cried out that he should show himself to her then his voice was heard saying that she, having bathed, should lie n with him on her bed on the night of the eighth or fourteenth day of the moon, then he would beget offspring upon her. By the corpse of her husband she gave birth to seven children three Śālvas and four Madras, .
Yaśas = Śiva .
Yaśasvinī, a mātṛ. u, .
Yaśodā, wife of the cowherd Nanda. f, .
Yaśodhara, son of Kṛṣṇa and Rukmiṇī .
Yaśodharā, a Trigarta princess .
Yaśovara, v. Yaśodhara.
Yaśovāsas = Mahāpuruṣa .
Yad = Viṣṇu .
Yādasāṃ bhartā, Yādasāṃ pati = Varuṇa
Yādava, pl a people = Yadu. pl commonly synonymous with Vṛṣṇi, pl . l, . b, . b, .
Yādava1 = Śūra, .
Yādava2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yādava3 = Sātyaki, .
Yādava4 Vajra, .
Yādava5, dual = Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, .
Yādava6, adj. .
Yādavaśreṣṭha1 = Balarāma, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yādavaśārdūla = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yādavāgrya = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yādavanandana = Kṛṣṇa, . Sarvayādavanandana.
Yādavarṣabha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yādaveśvara = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yādavī = Aśmakī, . Do. = the mother of Śiśupāla, . Do. = Kuntī, . Do. = Subhadrā, .
Yādavīmātṛ = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Yādavīputra = Yudhiṣṭhira, .
Yadu1, son of Yayāti and ancestor of the Yadus . b, . e, . b, . Daivayāneya.
Yadu2, a prince .
Yadu, pl a people = Yādava, pl commonly synonymous with Vṛṣṇi, pl . d, .
Yaduśreṣṭha1 = Balarāma, .
Yaduśreṣṭha2 = Śūra, .
Yaduśreṣṭha3 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yaduśārdūla1 = Balarāma, .
Yaduśārdūla2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yadūdvaha1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yadūdvaha2 = Sātyaki, .
Yadūdvaha3 = Vasudeva, .
Yadukulaśreṣṭha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yadukula Pāṇḍava nandana = Kṛṣṇa
Yadukulodvaha1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yadukulodvaha2 = Vasudeva, .
Yadunandana1 = Balarāma, .
Yadunandana2 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yadunandanī = Subhadrā, .
Yadupravīra1 = Balarāma, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yadupuṅgava = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yadusiṃha = Balarāma, .
Yadusukhāvaha = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yadūttama1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yadūttama2 = Sātyaki, .
Yaduvaṃśavivardhana = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yaduvara, dual = Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa, .
Yaduvīra1 = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Sātyaki, .
Yaduvīramukhya = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yaduvṛṣa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yaduvyāghra = Sātyaki, .
Yāja, a Brahmarṣi, brother of Upayāja. b Drupada saw the two brothers of Kaśyapas race, Y. and Upayāja. He courted Upayāja and asked him to perform a sacrifice, by which he might obtain a son who might slay Droṇa, and promised him an arbuda of kine. But Upayāja refused. Drupada once more began to pay homage to him, and after a year Upayāja said that his elder brother, Y once had taken up a fruit without inquiring of the purity of the spot, and had, in the house of his preceptor, used to eat the remains of other peoples feasts he would entertain no scruples. Describing the might of Droṇa Drupada promised Y. to give him eight ayutas of kine. Y. consented and prevailed upon Upayāja to assist him. Upayāja then spoke to Drupada of everything required for the sacrifice, . Kāśyapa, dual.
Yājabha, v. Ṛṣabha.
Yajana, a tīrtha .
Yājana, a tīrtha .
Yajin = Śiva .
Yajña, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Mahāpuruṣa .
Yajñabhāgahara = Mahāpuruṣa .
Yajñabhāgavid = Śiva .
Yajñabhṛt = Viṣṇu .
Yajñabhuj1 = Agni, . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Yajñādhipa = Śiva .
Yajñagarbha = Mahāpuruṣa .
Yajñaguhya = Viṣṇu .
Yajñahan = Śiva .
Yajñahṛdaya = Mahāpuruṣa .
Yajñakṛt = Viṣṇu .
Yajñamṛgavyādha = Śiva .
Yajñamuṣ, pl a class of gods .
Yajñānām pati = Śiva, .
Yajñāṅga, pl. .
Yajñāṅga = Viṣṇu . Cf .
Yajñāntakṛt = Viṣṇu .
Yajñapati1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu, .
Yajñāri = Śiva .
Yajñasādhana = Viṣṇu .
Yajñasamāhita = Śiva .
Yajñasambhava = Mahāpuruṣa .
Yajñasena1 = Drupada, q.v. Do. = Kṛṣṇa
Yajñasenasuta = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Yājñaseni1 = Śikhaṇḍin, .
Yājñaseni2 = Dhṛṣṭadyumna, .
Yājñasenī = Draupadī, .
Yajñastuta = Mahāpuruṣa .
Yajñātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yajñavāha1, a warrior of Skanda. u, . Do. = Śiva .
Yajñavāhana = Viṣṇu .
Yājñavalkya, a ṛṣi . b, .
Yajñayoni = Mahāpuruṣa .
Yajñendra, .
Yajñin = Viṣṇu .
Yajuḥpādabhuja = Śiva .
Yajurmaya = Śiva .
Yajurveda . b, . next.
yajus, mostly pl . Yajurveda.
Yajvan = Viṣṇu .
Yakṛlloma, pl a people . next.
Yakṛlloman, pl a people . the prec.
Yakṣa1, pl a class of beings, .
Yakṣa2, sg . Names of single Yakṣas Amogha, . Macakruka, . Māṇivara, . Sthūṇa, .
Yakṣa3, sg said of Dharma assuming the form of a Y .
Yakṣādhipa = Kubera, .
Yakṣādhipati = Kubera, .
Yakṣapati = Kubera, .
Yakṣapravara = Kubera, .
Yakṣarāj = Kubera, . Do. = Maṇibhadra, .
Yakṣarāja = Kubera, .
Yakṣarājan = Kubera, .
Yakṣarakṣodhipa = Kubera, .
Yakṣarākṣasabhartṛ = Kubera, .
Yakṣayuddha .
. . The Pāṇḍavas, etc returned to the hermitage of Nārāyaṇa. Once Yudhiṣṭhira said to them We have passed these four years in the woods it has been appointed by Arjuna, that after the fifth year he will come to the mountain Śveta. They then set out with the brahmans and the Rākṣasas, and protected by Lomaśa, sometimes going on foot, sometimes carried by the Rākṣasas, towards the north, beholding on the way the mountains Maināka, Gandhamādana, and Śveta, and on the seventeenth day they reached the slopes of Himavat, not far from Gandhamādana, and were received by R. ṛ. Vṛṣaparvan in his hermitage, where they passed seven nights. On the eighth day they entrusted their remaining robes, their sacrificial vessels, ornaments, and jewels to Vṛṣaparvan, and, following his instructions, set out for the north, on foot, with Dhaumya, Kṛṣṇā, and Lomaśa. On the fourth day they reached Śveta, and entered Gandhamādana with Draupadī and the brahmans, and saw the great Gaṅgā . Thereafter, they went to the hermitage of Ārṣṭiṣeṇa . Ārṣṭiṣeṇa received the four Pāṇḍavas and Kṛṣṇa and Dhaumya, and said that during the parvan days ṛṣis living upon water and air and moving through the sky come to this mountain, sounds of kettledrums, etc being heard on the summits, and that they should not attempt to proceed further, but wait for Arjuna there, as they could not go beyond Kailāsa . . They passed the fifth year in the hermitage of Ārṣṭiṣeṇa, eating flesh of deer killed with unpoisoned shafts, listening to the stories told by Lomaśa. Ghaṭotkaca had departed, promising to be present when occasion arose. Munis and Cāraṇas visited them. One day Suparṇa carried off a mighty Nāga from the lake, while the mountain trembled, etc and the wind, raised by Suparṇas wings, brought celestial flowers of five colours before the Pāṇḍavas towards the river Aśvarathā. Kṛṣṇā expressed to Bhīma the wish of seeing the top of the mountain when he had driven away the Rākṣasas. Bhīma set out with bow, sword, and mace, and having ascended the summit, thereby gladdening Kinnaras, Nāgas, Munis, Gan dharvas, and Rākṣasas, he blew his shell. Yakṣas and Rākṣasas assailed him with maces, clubs, etc but were killed or defeated, and the surviving fled towards the south, forsaking their weapons. The Rākṣasa Maṇimat, the friend of Kubera, in vain attempted to recall them, and with clubs, javelins, etc he rushed at Bhīma and pierced his right arm with an iron spear with a golden haft, but at last was killed by Bhīma with his mace. The surviving Rākṣasas went towards the east . . Hearing various sounds and not seeing Bhīma, the Pāṇḍavas and Kṛṣṇā, and Dhaumya and the brahmans were filled with anxiety, and, entrusting Draupadī to the charge of Ārṣṭiṣeṇa, they ascended the summit of the mountain and embraced Bhīma, who was censured and again warned by Yudhiṣṭhira. Kubera, on hearing about the matter from the Rākṣasas, in anger let yoke his carriage, and, eulogized by the gods and Gandharvas, and surrounded by, Yakṣas, he set out through the firmament to Gandhamādana, where he seated himself on his seat Puṣpaka, surrounded by Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Gandharvas, and Apsarases, with his noose and sword and bow, and asked Yudhiṣṭhira not to be angry with Bhīma as Bhīma had only been the instrument of destiny, and said to Bhīma that he did not mind his act of rashness as he had thereby been delivered from the curse of Agastya . Kubera then gave Yudhiṣṭhira some wise counsel, referring to the Kṛta yuga he said, that Yudhiṣṭhira ought to check the rashness of Bhīmasena they should return to the hermitage of the R. ṛ Ārṣṭiṣeṇa and reside there during the first dark fortnight the inhabitants of Alakā with Gandharvas, and Yakṣas with Kinnaras, etc should, at the command of Kubera, protect them, and his servants procure for them meat and drink he praised Arjuna . Arjuna would soon join them. Then Kubera went to the mountain Asta, followed by thousands of Yakṣas and Rākṣasas in vehicles drawn by horses flying in the air. The dead bodies of the Rākṣasas were, at the command of Kubera, removed. The Pāṇḍavas dwelt several nights there, being honoured by the Rākṣasas . . At sunrise, Dhaumya and Ārṣṭiṣeṇa came to them, and Dhaumya, seizing Yudhiṣṭhiras hands, pointed out, towards the east, the Mandara mountain, the east being the region of Indra and Vaiśravaṇa, as the South is that of Yama with his abode Saṃyamana, and the Asta mountain, where the sun sets in the west, that of Varuṇa, together with the ocean in the north Meru, with the dwelling of Brahmán, where Prajāpati creates all creatures, and the seven mind born sons of Brahmán, and where the seven Devarṣis, with Vasiṣṭha at their head, rise and set next, to the east of Meru, the abode of Nārāyaṇa or Viṣṇu, that cannot be seen by gods or Dānavas, and where even Brahmarṣis have no access, not to speak of Maharṣis, but only Yatis thence, they not return to this world Viṣṇu alone shines there. Description of the revolving around Meru of the sun, moon, and stars . . The Pāṇḍavas dwelled there for a month, visited by Gandharvas and Maharṣis. A night and a day became to them like a year, for since the departure of Arjuna, they had not felt joy. After having dwelt for five years in the abode of Indra and obtained all celestial weapons from him, Āgneya, Vāruṇa, Saumya, Vāyavya, Vaiṣṇava, Aindra, Pāśuvata, Brāhmya, Pārameṣṭhya, and those of Prajāpati, Yama, Dhātṛ, Savitṛ, Tvaṣṭṛ, and Vaiśravaṇa, Arjuna took leave of Indra and came to Gandhamādana .
Yakṣendra1 = Kubera, . Do. = Māṇibhadra
Yakṣī Draupadī was questioned if she was a Y.Pāṇḍava praveśap.
Yakṣiṇī .
Yama1, lord of the spirits of the dead, son of Vivasvat, often identified with Dharma . d, . u, . ff, . kk, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, . c, . d, . f, . g, . b, . also Dharma and the following synonyms Daṇḍin, Deveśa, Kṛtānta, Lokapāla, q.v. Pitrīśa, . Pitṛpati, . Pitṛrāja, . Pitṛrājan, . Pretādhipa, Pretarāj, Pretarāja, Sureśa, Sūryaputra, Vaivasvata, q.v.
Yama2, a companion of Skanda. u, .
Yama3 = Sūrya, . Do. = Śiva . Do. = Mahāpuruṣa . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Yama, dual = Nakula and Sahadeva, . Yamaja, dual.
Yāma = Sūrya, .
Yāma, pl a class of celestial beings, mentioned together with the Dhāmas . u, .
Yāmadagnya v. Jāmadagnya.
Yamadūta, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Yamaja = Śiva, .
Yamaja, dual. = Nakula and Sahadeva, . Yama, dual.
Yamaloka . Asked by Yudhiṣṭhira, Mārkaṇḍeya said that the distance of Y. from the world of men is, yojanas, the way is terrible, and people are led along it by the messengers of Yama under conditions answering to their charity and fasts when alive . There is the river Puṣpodakā from that river those who have given water drink clear water, while those of evil deeds have pus ordained for them, . . Yāmyaloka.
Yama sabhā varṇana . The sabhā of Yama Vaivasvata covers an area of more than yojanas, and was built by Viśvakarman it is possessed of the splenr of the sun, and yields every thing, etc. There are many rājarṣis and Brahmarṣis, Agastya, Mataṅga, Kāla, Mṛtyu, the performers of sacrifice, Siddhas, yogins, the Pitṛs belonging to the classes Agnisvāttāḥ, Phenapāḥ, Uṣmapāḥ, Svadhāvantaḥ, and Barhiṣadaḥ, the wheel of time, Havyavāhana, the sinners, and those who have died during the suns southern course, those who are employed in regulating time, and the servants of Yama the śiṃśapa, pālāśa, kāśa, kuśa, and other trees and plants, many Gandharvas and Apsarases .
Yamunā, a river, the present Jamna . b, . b, . b, . b, . m, . j, . Kālindī, Kalmāṣī.
Yāmuna1, name of a mountain .
Yāmuna2, adj. .
Yāmuna3, pl a people .
Yamunātīrtha1 = Plakṣāvataraṇa, .
Yamunātīrtha2, name of a tīrtha on the Sarasvatī. dd In the Y Varuṇa, the son of Aditi, had in days of yore, performed the rājasūya sacrifice having subjugated both men and celestials and G. and Rā. in battle, he per formed a great sacrifice in that tīrtha during that sacrifice a terrible battle ensued between the gods and the Dānavas after the completion of the rājasūya a terrible battle ensued among the kṣatriyas, .
Yāmya, adj. . b, . u, . ff, .
Yāmya2 = Śiva, . Do. = Mahā puruṣa .
Yāmyaloka = Yamaloka .
Yānasandhi .
the of the minor parvans of Mhbhr. . After the night had passed away, all the princes and chiefs, Bhīṣma, etc. entered the court hall to hear the message of Sañjaya, who had come back from the Pāṇḍavas by the aid of Saindhava steeds. Sañjaya related the salutations of the Pāṇḍavas . Sañjaya related that Arjuna had said, with Yudhiṣṭhiras sanction, that Sañjaya should say to Duryodhana and Karṇa, threatening them with Bhīmasena, etc that if the Dhārtarāṣṭras desired war, then all the aims of the Pāṇḍavas were accom plished, as Duryodhana should lie n on the bare earth, deprived of life, etc. Arjuna trusted himself and Kṛṣṇa he said that Duryodhana often thought of imprisoning Kṛṣṇa, and sought to create a sudden disunion between Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. There are with us many aged brahmans, versed in various sciences...who are pro phesying the great destruction of the Kurus and the Sṛñjayas, and the ultimate victory of the Pāṇḍavas... thy bow Gāṇḍīva yawns without being handled, etc. on the top of my flagstaff are heard terrific voices innumerable jackals howl at night, and Rākṣasas frequently alight from the sky... will use the Sthūṇākarṇa, Pāśupata, and Brāhma weapons, and all those that Śakra gave me. . Bhīṣma said to Duryodhana that Nara and Nārāyaṇa were Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa it was with their aid that Śakra vanquished the Daityas and Dānavas Nara slew hundreds and thousands of Paulomas and Kālakañjas in battle Arjuna, with an arrow, severed the head of the Asura Jambha while the latter was about to swallow him he afflicted Hiraṇyapura on the other side of the ocean, having vanquished in battle, of Nivātakavacas and in the same way also Nārāyaṇa has, in this world, destroyed numberless other Daityas and Dānavas. Karṇa boasted that he would slay all the Pāṇḍavas in battle, but was rebuked by Bhīṣma, saying that Karṇa had seen his own brother slain by Arjuna in the city of Virāṭa, and alluding to the contents of the Goharaṇa, and the Ghoṣayātrāparvan. Droṇa also counselled peace, but got no answer from Dhṛtarāṣṭra . At the request of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related that the Pañcālas, etc. looked up to Yudhiṣṭhira. As he was questioned about Dhṛṣṭadyumna and the Somakas, he first fell n in a swoon. Then, regarding Bhīmasena he mentioned the lac house, etc. regarding Arjuna, the burning of the Khāṇḍava forest, etc. then Nakula and Sahadeva Śikhaṇḍin the five Kekaya princes, etc. . Dhṛtarāṣṭra was most afraid of Bhīma, with his mace, mentioning his killing Jarāsandha . Dhṛtarāṣṭra was also afraid of Arjuna, who he feared would conquer Karṇa, and Droṇa thirty three years have passed since the burning of the Khāṇḍava forest we have never heard of his being defeated any where . Dhṛtarāṣṭra was afraid of the allies of Yudhiṣṭhira the Pāñcālas, Kekayas, etc. . Sañjaya rebuked Dhṛtarāṣṭra for his behaviour towards the Pāṇḍavas the Matsyas, etc. all decline to pay thee homage now . Duryodhana said, that when the Pāṇḍavas had been exiled, there came to them Kṛṣṇa, etc all assembled in a place not far from Indraprastha, and suggested to Yudhiṣṭhira that he should take back the king the people of the realm were all annoyed with us, and all our friends also were angry with us but Bhīṣma, Kṛpa, and Aśvatthāman had despised the foes . Now the Pāṇḍavas are without allies and all these kings can, for my sake, enter the fire or the sea...Having given up all hopes of a town, Yudhiṣṭhira craves only five villages...There is none on earth equal to me in an encounter with the mace. In battle, am Saṅkarṣaṇas equal will certainly slay Bhīma, Bhīṣma, etc every one of these is singly capable of slaying the Pāṇḍavas. He alluded to the superhuman circumstances concerning Bhīṣma, etc to the resolution of the Saṃśaptakas to slay Arjuna or be slain by him our chief warriors are Bhīṣma, etc. they have seven akṣauhiṇīs, we have eleven Bṛhaspati has said, that an army which is less by one third ought to be encountered . At the request of Duryodhana, Sañjaya described the chariots of Arjuna, Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīmasena, Sahadeva, Nakula and excellent steeds, presented by the celestials, carry the sons of Subhadrā and Draupadī . At the request of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya mentioned the allies of the Pāṇḍavas, Kṛṣṇa, etc and who had been assigned to each of them as his share Śikhaṇḍin Bhīṣma Yudhiṣṭhira the Madra king Bhīmasena Duryodhanas sons and brothers, the rulers of the east and the south Arjuna Karṇa, Jayadratha, etc. the five Kekayas the Kekayas, Mālavas, Śālvakas, Trigartau Saṃśaptakau Abhimanyu Duryodhanas sons, Duḥśāsanas sons, king Bṛhadbala Draupadeyāḥ Dhṛṣṭadyumna Droṇa Cekitāna Somadatta Sātyaki Kṛtavarman Sahadeva Śakuni Nakula Ulūka, Sārasvatāḥ. All the other kings had been distributed in their respective shares. Thus the Pāṇḍava host had been distributed into divisions. Virāṭa with all his Matsya warriors would support Śikhaṇḍin. Dhṛtarāṣṭra was exceedingly afraid of Yudhiṣṭhira, etc Duryodhana said that Bhīṣma, etc. were invincible. Dhṛtarāṣṭra maintained that Bhīṣma did not wish a battle. Sañjaya said that Dhṛṣṭadyumna was always urging the Pāṇḍavas to fight, and professed that he would alone encounter all the assembled kings Bhīṣma, etc and his words were approved by Yudhiṣṭhira Dhṛṣṭadyumna had told Sañjaya to say to the Kurus, etc that they ought not to suffer themselves to be slain by Arjuna, who was protected by the celestials they should send a good man to Yudhi ṣṭhira and entreat him to accept the king. . Dhṛtarāṣṭra men tioned that Yudhiṣṭhira led the brahmacarya mode of life from his very youth, and saying that he himself, etc. did not applaud war, he urged Duryodhana to desist from hostilities and give back to the Pāṇḍavas their king, saying, that it was Karṇa, Duḥśāsana, and Śakuni who led Duryodhana astray. Duryodhana answered that, without depending upon Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc he and Karṇa and Duḥśāsana would perform, in honour of Yama, a sacrifice in battle and slay the Pāṇḍavas he said that he would sacrifice his life rather than surrender to the Pāṇḍavas even that much of land which may be covered by the sharp point of a needle. Dhṛtarāṣṭra said that he abaned Duryodhana for ever, and grieved for the kings who would be crushed by Yuyudhāna, etc. . At the request of Dhṛta rāṣṭra, Sañjaya related how he had entered the inner apart ments in order to inform Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa he had seen two straight lines on Arjunas foot soles. Kṛṣṇa had threatened the Kurus, mentioning that Kṛṣṇā had in voked him with tears, and that As men, Y G and N. were incapable of encountering Arjuna in battle, and alluding to his exploits in the city of Virāṭa . Dhṛtarāṣṭra represented to Duryodhana that Agni would help Arjuna, remembering what was e to him at Khāṇḍava, that Dharma, etc would help the Pāṇḍavas from parental affection, that Arjuna took up arrows at a time, that Bhīṣma, etc. regarded him as invincible, and said he desired peace . Duryodhana, inflamed with wrath, said that according to Vyāsa, Nārada, and Paraśu Rāma, the gods never engaged in work if Agni, Vāyu, Dharma, Indra, or the Aśvins had ever engaged in work, the Pārthas could never have fallen into distress, and they and the Maruts would not venture to protect his foes charmed by me, Agni will be instantly extinguished.. my energy is greater than that of the gods...it is who set agoing all the affairs of both gods and Asuras... neither . nor G nor As. nor Rā. are capable of saving him who has incurred my displeasure... thou wilt hear of the defeat of the Pāṇḍavas, etc. ...whatever knowledge of weapons there is in Bhīṣma, etc exists in me as well . Karṇa said to Duryodhana, mentioning the curse of Paraśu Rāma, when he, by a lie, obtained the Brāhma weapon from him, that he would slay the Pāñcālas, etc. . Bhīṣma mentioned the Khāṇḍava forest, and said that the dart which Karṇa had got from Indra, would be reduced to ashes by Kṛṣṇa with his discus, and that his other shaft, which he respectfully wor shipped with flowery garlands, would be destroyed by Arjuna because he was protected by Kṛṣṇa. Karṇa made the pledge not to fight before Bhīṣmas fall, and went to his own abode. Bhīṣma ridiculed Karṇas boasting before the kings of Avanti, etc. . Duryodhana boasted Vidura praised self restraint . Vidura related that once two birds had flown away with the net in which they were caught, but were again caught when they began to quarrel. So it is also with kinsmen. Once we, with some hunters and brahmans conversant with magic and charms, repaired to the northern mountain Gandhamādana, with excellent medicinal herbs, and inhabited by Si. and G. There was, on a pre cipice, some honey, Kuberas favourite drink, guarded by poisonous snakes the brahmans said that a mortal drinking of it would win immortality, a sightless man obtain sight, and an old man would become a youth. The hunters desired to obtain it, and all perished. So it is with Duryodhana. In a single chariot Arjuna conquered the whole earth Bhīṣma and Droṇa, etc. were routed by him at the city of Virāṭa. Remember also Drupada and the king of the Matsyas . Dhṛtarāṣṭra warned Duryodhana against the Pāṇḍavas, etc and recommended him to follow Bhīṣma, etc. as his guides, mentioning the combat at the city of Virāṭa . At the request of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya related that Arjuna had said that Bhīṣma, etc. were all on the eve of death, if they did not give up to Yudhiṣṭhira his own share of the king . As Duryodhana showed little regard for the words of Sañjaya, and the rest remained silent, the assembled kings rose and retired. Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who always followed the counsels of his son, began to inquire in secret of Sañjaya about the resolves of his own party and of the foes. Sañjaya caused him to let Vidura introduce Vyāsa and Gāndhārī . Sañjaya extolled Kṛṣṇa, and mentioned some of those whom he had vanquished . Discourse between Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Sañjaya on the attributes of Kṛṣṇa. Dhṛtarāṣṭra told Duryodhana to seek refuge with Kṛṣṇa. Duryodhana refused. Dhṛtarāṣṭra complained of him to Gāndhārī. Gāndhārī threatened Duryodhana with Bhīmasena. Vyāsa recommended to Dhṛtarāṣṭra to seek salvation through Kṛṣṇa. Requested by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya explained the path of salvation through Kṛṣṇa . At the request of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya enumerated some names of Kṛṣṇa . Dhṛtarāṣṭra complained that he could not see Kṛṣṇa, whom he extolled under several names .
Yaṣṭṛ = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yāska, a ṛṣi. b, .
Yati1, son of Nahuṣa .
Yati2, a son of Viśvāmitra. b, .
Yati3 = Śiva, .
Yātudhāna, pl a class of demons ʹ, . f, . Do sg .
Yātudhānī, a hag, created by Vṛṣadarbha. b, .
Yaudheya, son of Yudhiṣṭhira and Devikā .
Yaudheya, pl a people .
Yaudhiṣṭhira = Prativindhya, .
Yaudhiṣṭhira, pl. .
Yaudhiṣṭhira, adj. .
Yaudhiṣṭhiri = Prativindhya, .
Yauga v. yoga, pl.
Yauna, pl. = Yavana, pl .
Yauvanāśva, Yauvanāśvi = Māndhātṛ, q.v.
Yauyudhāni, son of Sātyaki .
Yavakri = Yavakrīta, .
Yavakrī = Yavakrīta, .
Yavakrin = Yavakrīta, .
Yavakrīta, a ṛṣi, son of Bharadvāja . Bhāradvāja2, Yavakri, Yavakrī, Yavakrin.
Yavakrītātmaja .
. . The learned Raibhya and the Ṛṣi Bharadvāja were friends. Raibhya had two learned sons, Arvāvasu and Parāvasu Bharadvāja only one son, Yavakrīta. As Yavakrīta saw that Raibhya and his sons were esteemed by the brahmans, while Bharadvāja was slighted, he practised austerities in order to acquire Vedic knowledge for himself and his father instead of acquiring it from a teacher during a long time. Indra was alarmed, and twice he in vain attempted to make Yavakrīta desist from his penances, saying that they never could be successful. As Yavakrīta declared that he would cut off his limbs and sacrifice them in the fire, Indra assumed the guise of an old decrepit brahman, and began to throw up a dam of sand at that spot of the Bhāgīrathī where Yavakrīta used to bathe, and declared that Yavakrītas intentions were equally im possible. Then Yavakrīta desisted from his plan, and Indra granted him that the Vedas should be revealed to him and his father, and that he should excel other men. Bharadvāja said that Yavakrīta would become proud and uncharitable and thence destruction would soon overtake him, and told him some gāthās, narrated by the gods, about Medhāvin . . Bharadvāja made Yavakrīta promise to shun the irritable Raibhya and his sons, and Yavakrīta began to offend other ṛṣis . Once, in the month of Mādhava, he came to the hermitage of Raibhya and seduced the wife of Parāvasu. When Raibhya came home and saw what had happened, he offered in the fire two matted locks of his hair, whence sprang out a woman resembling his daughter in law, who robbed Yavakrīta of his water pot, and a Rakṣas, who flew at him with his uplifted spear, as he had been deprived of his water pot and rendered unclean . Yavakrīta fled to a tank and then to all the rivers, and, finding them all devoid of water, he attempted to enter into the agnihotra room of his father, but was stopped at the r by a blind śūdra warder, and killed by the rakṣas. The Rakṣas, with the permission of Raibhya, began to live with the female . When Bharadvāja returned home, the sacrificial fires, which used to welcome him every did not come forward to welcome him. Having heard from the śūdra what had happened, he cursed Raibhya, saying that he should be killed by his eldest son. He cremated Yavakrīta, and then himself entered the fire . At that time king Bṛhaddyumna, the yājya of Raibhya, employed Arvāvasu and Parāvasu at a sacrifice, while Raibhya stayed at home with the wife of Parāvasu. One day Parāvasu, returning home to see his wife, met in the darkness his father in the wood wrapped in the skin of a black antelope, and, mistaking him for a deer, killed him. Then, after having performed the funeral rites of his father, he prevailed upon Arvāvasu to observe the vow prescribed in the case of killing a brahman, while he himself conducted the sacrifice alone. When Arvāvasu came back, having observed the vow, Parāvasu caused him to be driven away from the sacrifice as a slayer of a brahman. The brahmarṣi Arvāvasu went to the wood, and, applying to the Sun, he practised austerities and mastered the Rahasyaveda of the Sun. The Sun appeared to him in his embodied form, and said the gods were pleased by him. They elected Arvāvasu and rejected Parāvasu. The gods Agni, etc granted him the boon that Raibhya, Bharadvāja, and Yavakrīta revived, that Parāvasu was absolved from his sin, that Raibhya did not recollect his having been slain, and that the Saura Veda should attain celebrity . The gods explained to Yavakrīta that Raibhya had been able to kill him because he had acquired his knowledge with great exertion and in the course of a long time, while Yavakrīta had learnt the Vedas without exertion and without a guru. Then Indra and the gods returned to heaven .
Yavakṣā, a river .
Yavana1, pl a people. c, . b, . Yauna, pl.
Yavana2, sg. . b, .
Yavana3, v. Cyavana2 .
Yāvana, adj. .
Yavanādhipa, one or more princes .
Yavya, pl a kind of ṛṣis, .
Yāyāta, adj. .
Yayāti, an ancient king, son of Nahuṣa bis . Having, after, years, been attacked with decrepitude, Y. asked his sons, one by one, to give him their youth and take upon them his decrepitude, but only the youngest, Puru, yielded to his wish, and taking upon himself the old age of Y. he ruled the king, while Y as strong as a tiger, enjoyed the company of his two wives and, in the Caitra ratha wood, of Viśvācī, but without becoming satiated. He then recited some verses and took back from his son his own decrepitude, giving him back his youth. He then installed Pūru on the throne, saying that he was his true heir, and should continue the lineage which should be named after him. Y. then retired to Bhṛgutuṅga, and having spent a long time in ascetism, observing the vow of fasting, he died and ascended to heaven with his wives, . Y. transferred his decrepitude to Pūru, etc. and cursed his other sons, Yadu, Turvasu, Druhyu, Anu . Y. sported with Viśvācī in the Nandana wood and in Alakā, and in the northern summit of Meru. Y. then recited some verses and installed Pūru as king . The offspring of Yadu, Turvasu, Druhyu, Anu, and Pūru, . Having installed Pūru on the throne, Y. entered the wood to lead the life of a hermit for, years and then ascended to Svarga, where he was reverenced by the gods, the Sādhyas, the Maruts, and the Vasus, wandering about in Devaloka and Brahmaloka. One day Indra asked him what he had said to Pūru when he bestowed the king upon him. Y. answered that he had said The whole country between the Gaṅgā and the Yamunā is thine, this is the central region of the earth, the outlying regions will be the inions of thy brothers. Those without anger are ever superior to those under its sway, etc. . As Y. said that he did not know his equal in ascetic austerities among men, gods, Gandharvas, and maharṣis, Indra declared that, owing to this haughtiness, he should fall from heaven, yet he should fall among the virtuous. When falling, he was beheld by the rājarṣi Aṣṭaka, of whom he was the maternal grandfather Y. spoke disapprovingly of haughtiness, etc and told that, leaving earth, he had obtained many high regions for, years, then he had dwelt in the town of Indra for, years, then for, years in the world of Prajāpati, then in the abode of Devadeva he had also dwelt in Nandana for ayutas of years, assuming any form at will, sporting with the Apsarases then there had come a messenger of the gods with a grim visage, who thrice had shouted to him fall then he had fallen from Nandana, hearing, while falling, the compassionate exclamations of the gods, who had directed him to fall to the sacrificial place of Aṣṭaka and his companions . Y. continued Those who speak of their own merits after having dwelt for, or, years in heaven, are med to suffer the pains of the hell called bhauma, and are attacked by certain Rākṣasas with sharp teeth. Y. then taught the lore of transmigration and emancipation . Y. explained the duties of gṛhasthas, bhikṣus, brahmacārins, and vānaprasthas, and the different kinds of munis and mauna . Y. then said now shall fall into the bhauma hell, the Lokapas of Brahmán hasten me thither. The kings Aṣṭaka, Pratardana, Vasu manas Auṣadaśvi, and Śibi Auśīnara, offered him their lokas and volunteered to go to hell in his place Y. did not accept the offer. Then appeared five golden chariots, in which they all five ascended to heaven, Śibi leaving the others behind him. Y. told them that he was their maternal grandfather, that he had given the whole earth with her horses, etc to brahmans, and that the earth and the firmament and fire existed owing to his truth . c Y. competed with Indra. On the place where he performed his sacrifice the ground is studded with places for the sacrificial fires of various forms, and the earth seems subsiding under the pressure of Y.s pious works, . Mārkaṇḍeya continued Once when King Y. Nāhuṣa was sitting on his throne, there came a brahman who asked him for wealth for his preceptor, with whom he had made the appointment always to question the giver with what feelings he would give him what he asked for. Y. answered that he always felt happy when giving, etc and gave him, kine, . As Y. was falling headlong towards the earth, while the kings and Si. and Aps. laughed, there came, at the command of Indra, a person whose business it was to hurl n those whose merits were exhausted, and told him that his pride had caused his fall. Y. uttered the wish that he might fall among the righteous. He fell n among his daughters sons Pratardana, Vasumanas, Śibi, and Aṣṭaka, in the Naimiṣa wood, where they performed a vājapeya sacrifice. They gave him their merits, and the result of all their sacrifices. Mādhavī also came and gave him the moiety of hers, likewise Gālava, who gave him the eighth part of his . As soon as Y. was recognized by those virtuous persons, he rose again to heaven without touching the surface of the earth, and his four daughters sons, in a loud voice, repeated the gift of their merits . Y. was honoured in heaven by G Aps . r, R. ṛ, and the gods. Brahmán explained to him that it was his vanity alone that had been able to destroy all his merit . Nārada continued Such was the distress into which Y. fell in consequence of vanity and Gālava owing to his obstinacy. Make peace with the sons of Pāṇḍu, . b Y the son of Nahuṣa, was the sixth in descent from Soma. Y. had five sons Yadu, the son of Devayānī, and thus the grandson of Śukra Kāvya was the eldest, while Pūru, the son of Śarmiṣṭhā was the youngest. Yadu humiliated all the kṣatriyas. He did not obey the injunc tions of his father, but insulted his father and brothers. He established himself in the city named after the elephant . Y. cursed him and expelled him from the king. He also cursed his other sons who were obedient to Yadu, and placed his youngest son, Pūru, on the throne, . Y the son of Nahuṣa, performed rājasūya sacrifices, he gave to the brahmans the whole of the wealth in the possession of Mlecchas, etc. he sided with the gods against the Asuras having divided the earth into four parts, he gave it away to four persons . His wives were Devayānī, daughter of Uśanas, and Śarmiṣṭhā he roved through the celestial woods, at last he installed Pūru on the throne and retired into the forest, . e, . b, . b, . b, . . b, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms Nāhuṣa, . Nahuṣātmaja, . Sarvakāśīśa, .
Yayātijā = Mādhavī, .
Yayātipatana, name of a tīrtha .
. . Vaiśampāyana promised to recite the genealogy of Prajāpati Dakṣa, Manu Vaivasvata, Bharata, Kuru, Pūru, Ājamīḍha, the Yādavas, the Kauravas, and the Bharatas. Dakṣa. Manu Vaivasvata. Purūravas. Nahuṣa. Yayāti. Kaca. Devayānī. Yayāti.
Yāyāvara, pl a family of brahmans .
Yodhya, pl a people .
Yoga1, name of a certain system of philosophy and religious practice . b, . b, . d, . g, . b, .
Yoga2, .
yoga2, mostly pl . Do. sg. = Śiva, . Do. sg. = Viṣṇu .
Yoga4, a ṛṣi .
Yogācārya1 = Śukra, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. = Sanatkumāra, .
Yogādhyakṣa, Yogakara = Śiva .
Yoganidrātman = Kṛṣṇa, .
yogātman, said of Śiva, Kṛṣṇa, Puruṣa, Sūrya, Vyāsa, the yogin in general .
Yogavidāṃ netṛ = Viṣṇu .
Yogayogīśa = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yogeśvara1 = Śiva, . Do. = Śuka, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do. pl .
Yogīśa1 = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yogīśvara1 = Śiva, . Do. = Kṛṣṇa, . Do pl .
yogin, sg. or pl Do. said of certain persons Arjuna2, Śiva, ci, Viṣṇu, Nārāyaṇa
Yojanagandhā = Satyavatī, .
Yojya = Śiva .
Yoni, a tīrtha .
Yonidvāra, a tīrtha .
Yotimatsaka, v. Potimatsaka.
Yudhāmanyu, a Pāñcāla, brother of Uttamaujas ʹ, ʹ, . Pāñcalaja, Pāñcālya, dual, Saumaki.
Yudhiṣṭhira Pāṇḍava, also named Ajātaśatru and Dharmarāja, eldest son of Pāṇḍu and Kuntī . b Kuntī bore Y. under the conjunction of Jyeṣṭhā at the eighth muhūrta, named Abhijita divāmadhyagate sūrye tithau pūrṇe tipūjite . An incorporeal voice foretold his greatness, . d Y. excelled everyone in driving, . bis, . Mārkaṇḍeya told Y. various legends, . . Mārkaṇḍeya told Y. the story of Rāma Dāśarathi, ʹ, . . .
Yudhiṣṭhirāśvāsa . Mārkaṇḍeya consoled Yudhi ṣṭhira, reminding him of Rāmas victory over Rāvaṇa by means of monkeys and bears thou acts as a kṣatriya and has no sin, even the gods, with Indra and the Asuras, must endure the same it was after such affliction that Indra, with the Maruts, slew Vṛtra, Namuci, and the Rākṣasī Dīrghajihvā Arjuna, Bhīmasena, Nakula, and Sahadeva are capable of vanquishing Indra with the Maruts Jayadratha, who abducted Kṛṣṇā, was vanquished .
yuga
Yuga = Śiva .
Yugādhipa = Śiva .
Yugādi = Mahāpuruṣa .
Yugādikṛt = Viṣṇu .
Yugāgni = Kṛṣṇa, .
Yugamadhya = Mahāpuruṣa .
Yugandhara1, name of a place .
Yugandhara2, a Pāṇḍava warrior .
Yugandhara3, pl a people .
Yuganidhana = Mahāpuruṣa .
Yugapa, a Gandharva .
Yugarūpa, Yugāvaha = Śiva .
Yugāvarta1 = Śiva . Do. = Viṣṇu .
Yukta, Yuktabāhu = Śiva .
Yūpadhvaja, Yūpaketana, Yūpaketu = Bhūriśravas, q.v.
Yuvan = Śiva
Yuvanāśva, an ancient king . b, . Saudyumni.
Yuvarājā Cedīnāṃ, .
Yuyudhāna = Sātyaki, q.v.
Yuyutsu, son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra and a vaiśyā among eleven sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra who are mahārathasAṃśāvat.d Vaiśyā putraḥ...Dhārtarāṣṭraḥ śatādhikaḥVaiśyā putraḥ...Dhārtarāṣṭraḥ śatādhikaḥGāndhārī putrotpattikaraṇaḥ, born from a vaiśyāVaiśyāputraḥDuḥśalotpattiDhṛtarāṣṭraputranāmak.enumeration of the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, .DrupadaśāsanaSvayaṃ varap.came to the svayaṃvara of Draupadī, .Draupadīparitāpav.Sañjayayānap.Vaiśyā putraḥYānasandhip.according to Nīl.Bhagavadyānap.Ulūkadūtāga manap.toyaṃ, sc. puruṣodudhiṃ, i.e. the army of Duryodhana, only C.Bhīṣmavadhap.joined the PāṇḍavasDroṇābhiṣekap.f at Vāraṇāvata many wrathful kings battling together for six months, desiring to slay Y could not vanquish himSaṃcaptakavadhap.cf proceeded against Droṇa, description of his horsesfought with his brother Subāhu fought with the elephant of BhagadattaPratijñāp.KauravyaṃKarṇap.oḥ kāñcana dhvajaḥvanquished by Ulūkaattacked Karṇaattacked VasuṣeṇaHradapraveśap.returned to HāstinapuraGadāyuddhap.Jalapradānikap.Śrāddhap.among those whom Yudhiṣṭhira ordered to perform the funeral rites for the dead warriorsRājadh.accompanied YudhiṣṭhiraDhārtarāṣṭrasyaproceeded to see BhīṣmaSvargāro haṇik. p.present when Bhīṣma ascended to heavenAnugītāp.Kauravyaḥ, all. to the battleKauravyaṃ...Dhrtarāṣtrajam, remained in Hāstinapura while the Pāṇḍavas fetched the gold, Āśramavāsap.Vaiśyāputraḥremained in Hāstinapura while the Pāṇḍavas visited Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc.Nāradāgamanap.performed the funeral rites for Dhṛtarāṣṭra, etc.Mahāprasthānikap.Vaiśyāputre, Yudhiṣṭhira made over the king to Y Parikṣit being installed on the thronethe son of a vaiśyāYYYYYonly B.YY
