abhagnaparisankhyaana, the great spirit. b, .
aabhaasuraa, a class of gods .
abhibhu, king of kaashi vibhu. = krishna, .
abhijit, the nd of the nakshatras, when beginning with ashvini .
abhijita, the eighth hour of the day . a nakshatra .
abhimanyu, son of arjuna and subhadraa, sister of krishna, is an incarna tion of varcas, son of soma, wherefore he enters soma after death, after his karman has elapsed etymology of his name he is the vamshakara of the paandavas . in the beginning of the exile of the paandavas he is carried to dvaarakaa with his mother by krishna, where he is educated and protected by raukmineya . after the elapse of the exile he joins the paandavas in upaplavya with krishna and subhadraa, and is there married to uttaraa, daughter of king viraata . he fights bravely in the great battle, until he on the when enjoined by yudhishthira to break dronas cakravyuha, is surrounded and killed by jayadratha and his people, leaving his wife uttaraa with a yet unborn son, parikshit, the only one left to propagate the race of the paandavas. at first he is not seen in heaven by yudhishthira, but later he is shown to him beside soma in heaven . l, . g, . st day of the battle, . nd day of the battle, . rd . . . . . . . . . . . aarjuni, saubhadra, kaarshni, arjunaatmaja, arjunaavara, phaalguni, shakraatmajaatmaja.
. the day broken by arjuna, and drona having failed to seize yudhishthira, the kurus were regarded as defeated they heard all praising arjuna and krishna. next morning duryodhana blamed drona for not having seized yudhishthira drona said that even as g y n and raa. cannot defeat the force protected by arjuna and krishna, save mahaadeva but to day he would slay a mighty car warrior. the samshaptakas challenged arjuna and took him away to the southern side of the field. abhimanyus slaughter by dushaasanas son is alluded to by sanjaya. dhritaraashtra grieves. sanjaya relates . sanjaya praises yudhi shthira, etc. . drona had formed the great circular array lakshmana at their head duryodhana, etc. in the middle at the head the commander drona, etc. . the paandavas were headed by bhimasena saatyaki, etc. drona, whom the paancaalas and the srinjayas could not approach. yudhi shthira says that only abhimanyu, etc can break the array of drona, and orders abhimanyu to it bhima, etc. followed him praised by yudhishthira, who says that the protectors of dronas host resemble s r m or agni, or aaditya, abhimanyu orders his charioteer sumitra to urge the steeds towards dronas army . abhimanyu, etc drona, etc. abhimanyu breaks that part of the kuru army many steeds of the vanaayu, etc breeds were deprived of their ornaments, and caused delight to raa etc. . duryodhana abhimanyu drona, etc. abhimanyu rescuing duryodhana dusaha, etc abhimanyu, who slew the heir of ashmaka karna, etc abhimanyu, who slew sushena, etc and defeated shalya dronas troops fled p caa si etc glorify abhimanyu . abhimanyu slays shalyas younger brother, whose followers fled. abhimanyu, with the weapons he has received from krishna and arjuna, defeats all the warriors that encounter him. dronas army fled . abhimanyu drona, etc. . drona says that abhimanyu delights yudhishthira, etc. . duryodhana told karna, etc to crush abhimanyu, whom they attacked dushaasana abhimanyu abhimanyu addresses dushaasana dushaasana is borne away by his charioteer the paandavas, etc uttered leonine shouts, and attacked dronas array. karna . abhimanyu when karna is in great distress his younger brother encounters abhimanyu . abhimanyu slays karnas younger brother karna flies the kaurava array breaks, except the sindhu king . yudhishthira, etc endeavour to follow abhimanyu. jayadratha checks them with celestial weapons. dhritaraashtra enquires of sanjaya about the source of jayadrathas energy sanjaya narrates the boon obtained by jayadratha from shiva . jayadratha vanquishes all the paandava leaders with his steeds of the sindhu breed saatyaki, etc. bhima mounts the car of saatyaki the path made by abhimanyu is closed up notwithstanding the matsyas, etc. they are all checked by jayadratha . abhimanyu vanquished vrishasena, who was borne away from the battle, and slew vasaaliya and many others . abhimanyu seized satyashravas and routed the kurus rukmaratha abhi manyu, who slew him and his friends with the gaandharva weapon, though they were assisted by duryo dhana, who was filled with fear and fled . drona, etc abhimanyu, who beats them back except lakshmana, who is slain. duryodhana urged the troops to slay abhimanyu drona, etc encompassed abhimanyu, who seeks jayadratha kraathas son was slain, the others fled . drona, etc abhimanyu yudhishthira supporting jayadratha karna has one ear cut off abhimanyu slew vrindaaraka and brihadbala abhimanyu once more pierced karna in the ear, and slew the son of the magadha king, and ashvaketu, and the bhoja prince of maarttikaavata the son of dushaasana abhimanyu ashvatthaaman abhimanyu shalya, who mounts another car abhimanyu slew shatrunjaya, etc. abhimanyu shakuni, who tells duryodhana to take counsel with drona and kripa, etc about the means of slaying abhimanyu karna asks drona about the means of slaying abhimanyu drona, saying that he is gratified by abhimanyus prowess, tells karna, who is very afflicted with arrows, to cut off his bow, etc. karna then cut off abhimanyus bow, kritavarman slew his steeds, and kripa slew his two paarshni charioteers abhimanyu, then attacked by six car warriors, fights with the sword, which is cut off by drona, while karna cut off his shield then abhimanyu fought with a wheel then with a mace abhimanyu ashvatthaaman abhimanyu slew subalas son kaalikeya, and slew gaandhaara followers of his, and brahma vasaatiyas, kaikayas, and elephants abhimanyu dushaasanas son, who slays abhimanyu. invisible creatures censure the cowardly act of the kurus, headed by drona and karna. the paandava divisions fly, but are rallied by yudhishthira . in the evening the kurus withdrew to their encampment. raa. and psh etc on the field of battle . yudhishthira laments on the fall of abhimanyu . vyaasa comes and consoles him, relating to him the ancient story of what naarada had said in days of old to akampana . this story is purifying, etc. cast off thy grief abhimanyu has attained to heaven sprung from soma, he has disappeared in the lunar essence, cleansed from all his impurities . vyaasa recites to yudhi shthira the story of srinjaya, to whom naarada told shodasharaajika . vyaasa says that abhimanyu has attained to that eternal goal which is attained by yogins, and those that are living in heaven never prefer this world to heaven it is the living that stand in need of our grief, and not those who have attained to heaven his sins increase for whom the living grieve. then vyaasa disappeared, and yudhishthira became free from grief but what shall we say to arjuna .
aabhira, a people in the west of india upon the indus are conquered by nakula at his digvijaya bring tribute to yudhishthira . maarkandeya prophesies that in the kali yuga there shall be many aabhira and other barbarous kings . the aabhiras are mentioned by sanjaya in the enumeration of the people of bhaaratavarsha, . they are placed in the eyes of dronas suparnavyuha on the twelfth day of the battle, . from hatred towards them the sarasvati disappeared at vinashana, . they have become shudras, having omitted their duties of kshattriyas from fear of parashuraama, . when arjuna, after the catastrophe at dvaarakaa, is conducting the wives, children, and the old men from thence to indraprastha, the aabhiras attack him when he has arrived at pancanada, and rob most of the women, .
abhiraamaa, v. purvaabhiraamaa.
abhiru, a king, who was an incarnation of the sixth of the eight asuras of the family of the kaaleyaa, .
abhisaara, a people . together with other barbarous tribes they fight arjuna on the day of the great battle, . they are mentioned by krishna among the auxiliaries of duryodhana, on the day of the battle.
abhisaara, enumerated by sanjaya among the people of bhaaratavarsha, .
abhisaari, a town conquered by arjuna on his digvijaya, .
abhishaaha, a people with other barbarous tribes they attack arjuna at the instigation of dushaasana on the day of the great battle, . .
abhishaaha, a people first day of the battle, . . . . after the .
aabhishecanika parva, i.e .
abhishyanta, the second of the five sons of kuru and vaahini, .
acala1, brother in law of dhritaarashtra, brother of shakuni, .
acala2, a warrior of skandas, .
acalaa, a maatri, .
acyuta a proper name of krishna, etc. vishnu identified with krishna, . aanuja. an adjective, applied to a great many persons .
acyutaayus, a warrior always named together with shrutaayus they attack and wound arjuna, but are slain by him their sons will avenge them, but are likewise slain by arjuna, .
aashaavaha1, according to the expla nation of nilakantha, either a synonym of vaayu, the tenth of the twelve sons of heaven and vivasvat, viz the geniuses of the ten senses and mind together with mahya, who are all manifestations of the one son of heaven, or a vivasvat or form of the sun .
aashaavaha2, a prince, who has presented himself at the self choice of krishnaa.
ashiva, a form of agni in the enumeration of maarkandeya .
ashleshaa, a nakshatra on the day of the dark half of the month kaarttika, when the moon is in conjunction, with ashleshaa, a brahman, kshattriya, vaishya, or shudra may, after having fasted at a shraaddha, after the setting of the sun, deposit an offering of black clothes and unguents with flowers in an ant hill, begging the serpents to hand it over to the world elephants to increase their strength that it may be equal to the strength of vishnu, when he lifted up earth the formula is contained in vv. this he should for a whole year.
ashma, praises bhishma on his arrow couch.
ashmaka1, a raajarshi, son of vashishtha and madayanti, the wife of kalmaashapaada, .
ashmaka2, a brahman present at the deathbed of bhishma, .
ashmaka3, a king of the ashmakaa, .
ashmakaa, a people, no. .
ashmaki, a yaadavi, the wife of king praacinvat and mother of samyaati, .
ashman, a brahman consulted by janaka vaideha, .
ashmaprishtha, a holy stone in gayaa, a visit to which expiates the murder of a brahman, s, . pret silaa exists at the present day. it is not a stone, but a rocky hill some or feet high.
ashoka1, a king, .
ashokatirtha, a tirtha or holy place in the south, .
aashramanivaasa i.e. aashramavaasikaparvan.
aashramasthaana i.e. aashramavaasikaparvan.
the of the minor parvans of mhbhr. . asked by janamejaya how the paandavas, having acquired their king, conducted themselves towards dhritaraashtra, how dhritaraashtra and gaandhaari behaved, and for how many years his grandfather ruled the king, vaishampaayana said the paandavas ruled, placing dhritaraashtra at their head vidura, sanjaya, and yuyutsu used to wait upon dhritaraashtra for years they did all things under the advice of the old king kunti obeyed gaandhuri draupadi and subhadraa, etc showed the utmost respect for the old king and his queen the paandavas surrounded the old king and his queen with every luxury, and maireya wines, etc. kripa waited upon dhrita raashtra vyaasa frequently visited him and recited histories of old ri celestial ascetics, p and raa. vidura, under the orders of dhritaraashtra, superintended religion and law through his policy the paandavas obtained numerous services from their feudatories and followers dhritaraashtra liberated prisoners and pared those condemned to death the old king, on his pleasure excursions, was supplied with everything by yudhishthira the kings who came to haastinapura waited upon dhritaraashtra as before kunti, etc served gaandhaari like maidservants bhimasena alone did not forget his grievances dhritaraashtra was honoured by ri and used to make gifts to the brahmans in rites for p. and shraaddhas for his sons, etc. dhritaraashtra also felt great affection for the paandavas, and so did gaandhaari gaandhaari performed shraaddhas with gifts grieved at the remembrance of duryodhana, dhritaraashtra every morning blessed the paandavas, wishing them victory in battle, etc. yudhishthira became very much liked by all the four castes, and forgot the wrongs inflicted upon him by dhritaraashtras sons from fear of yudhishthira nobody dared to speak evil of duryodhana or dhritaraashtra. bhima, however, reverenced the old king outwardly, with a very unwilling heart . while there was no variance in the cordiality between yudhishthira and dhritaraashtra, the latter could not but feel unfriendly towards bhima, and bhima, recollecting his foes duryodhana, karna, and dushaasana, indulged in boastful language about duryodhana and his brothers whom he had slain. gaandhaari was not moved. after years dhritaraashtra, afflicted by the wordy darts of bhima, became penetrated with despair and grief yudhishthira, etc did not know it. dhritaraashtra opened his heart to his friends now he was observing a vow of fast, which he had concealed from yudhishthira, lying on the earth clad in deerskin gaandhaari observed similar vows now he asked yudhishthiras permission for himself and gaandhaari to retire into the woods clad in rags and bark in order to practise austerities. yudhishthira lamented but dhritaraashtras resolution remains unaltered he asked sanjaya and kripa to speak for him to yudhishthira leaning on gaandhaari he looked like one deprived of life yudhishthira lamented, and gently rubbed dhritaraashtras breast and face with cold water and revived him by the touch of his hand, on which were jewels and medicinal herbs. dhritaraashtra said that the touch of yudhishthira was highly gratifying, embraced him, and smelt his head vidura, kunti, etc wept gaandhaari bore her sorrow with fortitude. dhrita raashtra renewed his request vyaasa came and asked yudhishthira to permit dhritaraashtra to follow the path of all the ancient r. ri. gaandhaari bears her grief with fortitude. yudhishthira yielded to vyaasas intercession vyaasa summed ap the reasons for dhritaraashtras retirement, and then proceeded to the woods. yudhishthira then said that he would conform to the advice of vyaasa, etc. dhritaraashtra, gaandhaari, etc entering the palace of dhritaraashtra, ate a little. then dhritaraashtra gave yudhish thira advice about how the latter should rule his king . continuation . continuation agreeably to the science known to ushanas, shakata, padma, and vajra should be formed thou hast been instructed in all duties by bhishma, krishna, and vidura horse sacrifices and righteous rule are productive of equal merit . yudhishthira gratefully accepted his instruc tions, as bhishma, etc no longer were there to instruct him. dhritaraashtra wishes to depart soon, and gaandhaari reminded him that he has got the permission of vyaasa, and asks him when he would go to the forest with the permission of yudhishthira he wished first to make gifts for the advance ment in the other world of his dead sons and other kinsmen, and assembled all the subjects, while yudhishthira brought all the articles necessary dhritaraashtra, in a touching address, took leave of that large concourse of men of all the four castes, recapitulating the history of the realm from shaantanu nwards . the citizens were exceedingly agitated upon hearing dhrita raashtras address they charged the learned brahman shaamba with answering him king duryodhana never did us any wrong we were well protected and ruled by him we have also enjoyed great happiness for thousands of years under yudhishthira, who follows the conduct of the r. ri. of old the carnage on the field of kurukshetra was not brought about by duryo dhana, karna, and shakuni, nor by dhritaraashtra, but by destiny, which in days caused akshauhinis to be destroyed by bhishma, etc. the paandavas are capable of ruling without either thee or ourselves to look after them kunti, etc will not the least wrong to the people. then dhritaraashtra slowly dismissed the assembly, and entered his house with gaandhaari . after that night had passed away, dhritaraashtra sent vidura to yudhishthira in order to announce that he would set out for the woods on the coming day of the full moon in the month of kaarttika, and to solicit some wealth for performing the shraaddha of bhishma, etc. . yudhishthira and arjuna applauded his words bhima was unwilling, recollecting duryodhana arjuna sought to pacify him, applauded by yudhishthira bhimasena maintained that gifts for bhishma, etc should be given by them, and by kunti for karna let duryodhana, etc sink from a miserable to a more miserable position, reminding his brothers of the woes and disgrace inflicted upon them by those for whose benefit dhritaraashtra asked for wealth . yudhish thira rebuked him . arjuna urged bhima to forget the injuries. yudhishthira said to vidura that he would give dhritaraashtra so much wealth as he wished for the obsequies of his sons and bhishma, etc and asked him to tell dhrita raashtra not to be angry with bhimasena . vidura reported the speeches of yudhishthira, arjuna, and bhima to dhritaraashtra. dhritaraashtra expressed his satisfaction, and set his heart on making large presents on the day of full moon in the month of kaarttika . dhritaraashtra invited thousands of deserving brahmans superior ri. for bhishma, etc. and made large gifts to them, naming drona, etc. tellers and scribes appointed by yudhishthira ceaselessly ask the old king as to what should be given to each recipient that presented himself unto him that was to receive a were given, and he who was to receive was presented with, at the command of yudhishthira this was given by dhritaraashtra for the benefit in the other world of his sons and grandsons, as also of himself and gaandhaari the ation lasted for days . on the day of full moon in the month of kaarttika dhritaraashtra summoned the paandavas, caused the rites to be performed, and his sacred fire to be taken up, put on deerskins and bark, and set out with his daughters in law. the ladies uttered loud wails yudhishthira and arjuna were pierced with grief bhimasena, etc all followed dhritaraashtra kunti held on her shoulders the hand of gaandhaari, who walked with her bandaged eyes dhritaraashtra walked behind gaandhaari, placing his hand on her shoulder krishnaa, etc all proceeded with dhrita raashtra the citizens of all orders were as distressed as they had been at the departure of the paandavas after the match of dice dhritaraashtra left the city through the principal gate, and then asked those who followed him to desist. vidura and sanjaya retired with him into the woods kripa and yuyutsu he caused to remain, and made them over to yudhishthira. kunti retired with dhritaraashtra, though yudhishthira sought to dissuade her she said never show any disregard for sahadeva he is very much attached to me, and to thee also then she reminded him of karna, etc. yudhishthira reminded her that she had herself formerly recited to them the story of vidulaa, when they were about to set out from the town, and that they had won sovereignty guided by her words com municated through krishna. also bhima dissuaded her, pointing out the grief of the sons of maadri but in vain. draupadi and subhadraa followed her, and so did the paandavas with all their wives and attendants kunti addressed them, assigning her reasons for her conduct . the paandavas and draupadi then desisted from following her. the paandavas circumambulated dhrita raashtra, etc for taking their leave to return. dhritaraashtra made a final effort of dis suading kunti from retiring into the forest with him, but in vain. the ladies set up a loud wail of grief. haastinapura became plunged into sorrow no festivals were observed. the paandavas were without any energy. dhritaraashtra arrived on the banks of the bhaagirathi and took rest there for the night among the brahmans, who there, like himself, ignited their sacred fires arrangement of the beds of vidura, etc. the yaajaka brahmans, etc of the king laid themselves n on their respective beds that night seemed as delightful to them as a braahmi night. when the night had passed away dhritaraashtra, etc going through their morning acts and rites, continue their journey . following the advice of vidura, dhritaraashtra took up his abode on the banks of the bhaagirathi many of the four orders came to see him he gladdened them all by his words. at evening dhritaraashtra, etc bathed in the stream, etc. kunti led him and gaandhaari. then he proceeded to kurukshetra to the retreat of r. ri. shatayupa, who received him with due rites accompanied by him he proceeded to the retreat of vyaasa, where he received the initiation after having returned he took up his abode in the retreat of shatayupa, who instructed him in all the rites of the forest mode of life, at the command of vyaasa. dhrita raashtra, etc began to practise austerities . ri. naarada, etc came there and gladdened dhritaraashtra with discourses on religion. ri. naarada mentioned the kings that attained to heaven after practising penances in that very retreat sahasracitya, shailaalaya, prishadhra, purukutsa, shashaloman thou also wilt, with gaandhaari, through the grace of vyaasa, attain to a very high goal dwelling in the presence of indra, paandu always thinks of thee, and will assist thee in the attainment of prosperity kunti, by serving thee and gaandhaari, will obtain residence with her husband in the other world we behold all this with our spiritual vision vidura will enter into yudhishthira sanjaya will ascend to heaven. dhritaraashtra, etc praised naarada. shatayupa asked naarada what regions will be acquired by dhritaraashtra. naarada said on a visit to indra saw paandu indra said that after three years dhritaraashtra and gaandhaari would go to the abode of kubera, on a car moving at will, and he would rove through the regions of g and raa. this is a mystery of the gods. all the persons present became highly pleased. then they went away by the path of the siddhas . the anxiety of the paandavas and citizens about the fate of dhrita raashtra, etc and their despair when they reflected on that terrible slaughter of their kinsmen only parikshit somehow consoled them afflicted with grief, they failed to derive pleasure from anything, nor did they attend to their kingly offices, thinking of kunti and gaandhaari. they set their heart upon seeing dhritaraashtra in his forest retreat. sahadeva, lamenting the fate of kunti, and ex pressing his longing to see her, proposed a visit to the woods, supported by draupadi, who mentioned kunti and gaandhaari and dhritaraashtra. yudhishthira caused his army to be equipped, ordered litters, etc for the ladies, and proclaimed that they would march out to morrow, permitting the citizens to follow them. the next morning they set out, then waited five days for such citizens as would accompany them, and then proceeded towards the forest, headed by arjuna and kripa bhima on a gigantic elephant, the twins on two fleet steeds, the ladies in closed litters, scattering showers of wealth as they proceeded, headed by draupadi. they proceeded slowly. yuyutsu and dhaumya protected the city. they reached kurukshetra, crossed the yamunaa, and approached the retreat of dhritaraashtra . the paandavas and their followers, alighting from their cars, walked on foot the ascetics told them that dhritaraashtra had gone to the yamunaa for his ablutions, etc and pointed out the way to them. sahadeva ran with speed towards kunti they both wept she informed gaandhaari, and then advanced towards yudhishthira, etc dragging the childless old couple the paandavas fell n at their feet, and took from their hands the jars of water they were carrying. yudhi shthira presented all his followers one after another to dhritaraashtra, mentioning their names and races. dhrita raashtra rejoiced and went to his retreat that was applauded by si. and caa. . to the ascetics, who had come from various regions in order to see the paandavas, sanjaya pointed out each of them then dhritaraashtra asked yudhishthira about the welfare of the paandavas and their devotion to p. and . yudhishthira answered, enquiring after vidura, who turned out to be engaged in penances, subsisting on air alone, and was now seen at a distance with matted locks, and gravel in his mouth, and exceedingly emaciated, naked, and besmeared with filth and dust vidura fled, pursued by yudhishthira at last he stood motionless in yoga, and entered the body of yudhishthira, who felt that he had become stronger than before and had acquired many additional virtues and accomplishments, and recollected his own state before his birth among men he had heard of yoga practice from vyaasa. he desired to cremate the lifeless body of vidura, but was prevented by an invisible voice which said, that in vidura was yudhishthiras body also, and that vidura would attain to the regions called santaanikaa. yudhishthira came and informed dhritaraashtra all became filled with wonder. they passed that night under a tree, conversing on morality and wealth. the next morning they surveyed the retreat and the other retreats in the forest. yudhishthira made presents to the ascetics then he returned to dhritaraashtra, etc. many m. ri. who dwelt in kurukshetra came there, as also vyaasa, who enquired after dhritaraashtras, etc welfare, and told them who vidura was, mentioning the curse of dharma by maandavya he was superior to brihaspati and shukra and how vyaasa had procreated him upon the soil of vicitravirya he was dharma in consequence of his practices of dhaaranaa and dhyaana from dharma also yudhishthira took his birth. vyaasa says that he has come to show a wonderful effect of his own penances what t thou wish to see, or ask, or hear .
aashramavaasikaparva i.e. aashramavaasikaparvan.
the of the greater parvans of mhbhr. aashramanivaasaparvan, aashramasthaana, aashrama vaasa2, aashramavaasika parva.
ashva1, a daanava, .
ashvashanku, brother of ashva, ayashanku.
ashvashiras1, brother of ashva, is incarnated as a king among the kaikeyas, .
ashvashiras3, the horse headed form of vishnu, .
ashvashiras4, a sacred place, .
ashvagriva1, brother of ashva, incarnated as king rocamaana, .
ashvaka, plur a people, lia .
ashvaketu, son of the magadha king, killed by abhimanyu on the day of the battle.
ashvalaayana, a son of vishvaamitras, .
ashvamedha i.e. aashvamedhika parvan.
ashvamedheshvara, a king in the east subdued by bhima .
ashvamedhika i.e. aashvamedhika parvan.
ashvamedhika parva . vaishampaayana said after dhritaraashtra had offered libations of water, yudhishthira fell n in grief on the bank of gangaa. incited by krishna, bhima took him up, surrounded by the paandavas dhritaraashtra comforts him, saying that it is he and gaandhaari who ought to grieve, and referring to viduras advice about abaning duryodhana and his warnings against karna and shakuni . krishna also exhorts him, referring to the duties of the kshattriyas expounded by bhishma, vyaasa, naarada, and vidura. yudhishthira cannot forget the slaughter of karna. vyaasa also comforts him, and reminding him that . and as. perform sacrifices, and that by sacrifices . vanquished daa he urged him to perform the raajasuya, the horse sacrifice, the sarva medha, and the naramedha the horse sacrifice after the example of raama daasharathi and bharata daushmanti, and indicated to him a spot in the himavat, where there was gold in abundance, left behind by the brahmans at the sacrifice of marutta of the karandhama race. asked by yudhishthira, vyaasa told the history of marutta i.e. samvartta maruttiya . vaishampaayana said yudhishthira was delighted at hearing the speech of vyaasa, and desirous of performing his sacrifices with those riches, he consulted with his ministers . vaishampaayana said when vyaasa had concluded his speech, krishna addressed yudhishthira, saying that yudhishthiras karman has not yet been annihilated, nor had his foes been subjugated how canst thou be ignorant of the enemies in thy own flesh and related the history of indras war with vritra . krishna then expounds that, as physical ailments and health depend on the distribution of the cold, warm, and windy of the body, so the mental ailments and health depend on sattva, rajas, and tamas in the soul happiness is overcome by sorrow, and sorrow by pleasure yudhishthira should not recall his past sorrows krishnaa in the assembly, etc. the time has now come when thou must fight single handed with thy mind salvation is not attained by foregoing external things mrityu is mine, and the eternal braahman is not mine as no creature is ever destroyed, ahimsaa may exist even when one has pierced body, and vice versa the yogin knows yoga to be the perfect way, on account of the practices of his many former births quoting the old verses sung by kaama no creature is able to destroy me without the methods ... . vaishampaayana said thus yudhishthira was consoled, exhorted by vishtarashravas, etc. and having again performed the obsequial rites for his relatives, etc he ruled the earth. he said to vyaasa, naarada, etc that he would now perform the sacrifice, and said that they would go to the himaalaya under the protection of vyaasa, according to the words of vyaasa, . ri. naarada, and devasthaana. then m. ri. took leave of yudhishthira, krishna, and arjuna. a short time passed away while they performed their purifications after bhishmas death, and gave large gifts to the brahmans as shraaddha to the kurus bhishma, karna, etc accompanied by dhritaraashtra, and then they entered the city of haastinapura . asked by janamejaya what krishna and arjuna did when the paandavas had reconquered and pacified their king, vaishampaayana said when the paandava king had been conquered and pacified k. and a. travelled with great pleasure amidst picturesque sceneries, like indra and his wife in heaven, or like the ashvins in nandana, and entered the palace of indraprastha in great merriment, reciting the genealogies of ri. and gods, etc and krishna consoled arjuna for the death of his relatives . it was long since he had seen vasudeva, baladeva, and the vrishni heroes he, therefore, asked leave to go to dvaaravati, and to accompany him to yudhishthira and apprise him of his departure. arjuna sorrowfully replied, be it so .
aashvamedhika parva i.e. ashvamedhika parva.
ashvanadi, a river upon which prithaa set the new born karna in a chest .
ashvapati1, brother of ashva1, incarnate as king haardikya, .
ashvapati2, a king of the madras, father of saavitri, .
ashvarathaa, a river on the mountain gandhamaadana, near the hermitage of aarshtishena, .
ashvasena, a scrpent, .
ashvaataka, plur a people in the army of duryodhana, .
ashvatara1, in the mhbhr. only appearing in the compound kambalaaau a pair of serpents, .
ashvatara2, a tirtha, .
ashvatirtha, a holy place on the gangaa in the neighbourhood of kanyaakubja, where varuna gave to ricika steeds as a ry to gaadhi, . vp .
ashvattha1, one of the names of the sun in the enumera tion of dhaumya .
ashvatthaaman1, son of drona and kripi . b . b, . ii fights saatyaki อด, อด, . aacaaryanandana, aacaaryaputra, aacaaryasuta, aacaaryatanaya, aacaaryasattama, drauni, draunaayani, dronaputra, dronasunu, guruputra, gurosuta, angirasaam varishtha, bhaarataacaaryaputra.
ashvatthaaman2, an elephant belonging to the maalava king indravarman and killed by bhima to delude drona and make him believe that his son had been killed .
ashvavati, a river .
aashvayuja, adj aashvayuj and no. aashvina he who then practises austerities, confining himself to one meal a is born pure and rich in carriages and sons.
ashvin, the surgeons of the gods they are, because of their beauty, often mentioned in comparisons . u, . naasatyau ashvinisutau suryaputrau bhishajau ashvibhyaam pati .
aashvina nos. and it is the sixth month of the solar year beginning with vaishaakha, or the seventh of the luni solar year beginning with caitra see whitney to su si, and, .
ashvini, a nakshatra, the first of the younger series, the twenty seventh of the older, beginning with krittikaa . ashvini.
ashvini, a tirtha .
adambara, a companion of skanda. u, .
aadaana, a name of earth .
adbhuta1, a name of fire .
adhiraajan, v. indra.
adhiraajyam and adhiraajakushaadya, see adhivaajyakulaadya.
adhiratha, a suta in the neighbourhood of campaa and friend of dhritaraashtra husband of raadhaa and foster father of karna, whom he called vasushena and sent to haastinapura to be instructed by drona at the show of arms he enters the arena to congratulate karna as king of anga .
adhivaajyakulaadya, a country vp .
adhivanga, a tirtha .
aadiparvan, the first book of mhbh .
aadiraaja, third son of avikshit and grandson of kuru .
aaditeya, the gods, .
aditi1, one of the thirteen daughters of daksha, who were married to kashyapa by him she is mother of the twelve aadityas . u, aditi cooked food for the gods, hoping that, having eaten it, they would kill the asuras there budha...said to her, give me alms she, saying that it was only to be eaten by the gods, gave him nothing, wherefore he cursed her, saying that she would have a pain vyathaa in her womb in the second birth as an egg of vivasvat, the egg of his mother aditi was killed therefore vivasvat shraaddhadeva became maarttanda. also, v. infra . devamaatri, shiva.
aditi2, the same identified with a sickness demon .
aditi3, the same conceived as a manifestation of shiva .
aaditya1, a class of gods, the sons of aditi and kashyapa, manifestations of the sun . they are twelve, enumerated, etc. etc. etc. br. s.v and muir, or. s.t especially iv, pp the youngest and most important is vishnu indra is the principal, and the oldest and best is varuna, . for their superintendence of the chariot of the sun, each in one of the twelve months of the year, in the puraanas, see vp pp. ff. the order is, indra, parjanya instead of savitri, . of the older conception of six, seven aadityas there seems to be no trace in the mhbh unless it be, they came into existence from the coals at the sacrifice of shiva in the shape of varuna, . in most cases they are named together with the other devaganas, etc. thus, for instance, v.s . bis, cf cf . u, etc etc. . kaashyapeyaa.
aaditya2, the gods in general, .
aaditya3, plur the seven suns that shall scourge the world at its dissolution and prepare the way for the samvartaka fire, .
aaditya4, the sun, . see surya.
aaditya5, a vishvadeva, .
aadityaketu, one of the sons of dhritaraashtra, .
aadityaparvata, the hermitage of shiva, .
aaditya tirtha, upon the sarasvati. ee, . there surya, having performed a sacrifice, obtained the sovereignty of all luminous bodies and acquired his great energy. there, on the bank of the river, . with . m g aps vyaasa, shuka, krishna, y raa psh etc always reside. there vishnu, having in days of yore slain as. madhu and kaitabha, had performed his ablutions. vyaasa, having bathed in that tirtha, obtained great yoga powers and success . and r. asita devala, having bathed in that tirtha with soul rapt in yoga, obtained great yoga powers.
the fifth chapter of the aadivamshaavataaranaparvan, it includes vasu uparicara and his sons. girikaa. matsya. vyaasa and his pupils. bhishma. animaandavya. sanjaya karna. krishna vaasudeva. . birth of saatyaki and kritavarman, drona, kripi, kripa, ashvatthaaman, dhrishtadyumna, krishnaa, nagnajit, and subala, shakuni, gaandhaari, and dhritaraashtra, paandu, and vidura, and yudhishthira and his brothers, and the sons of dhritaraashtra, of whom are enumerated as mahaarathas, and abhimanyu, and the sons of paancaali, and ghatotkaca, and shikhandi these are only the principal ones of the hundreds of thousands of monarchs who came to fight against each other in that great battle of the kurus.
aadivamshaavataaranaparvan . kathaa bandha in the intervals of the duties of the snake sacrifice vyaasa recited mahaabhaarata. kathaanubandha . hearing that janamejaya was installed in the snake sacrifice, krishna dvaipaayana went thither with his disciples, and asked by janamejaya about the kurus and paandavas, he directed his disciple vaishampaayana to tell their story. bhaaratasutram . vaishampaayana gives a survey of the history of the paandavas. bhaarataprashamsaa . janamejaya wishes to hear the mahaabhaarata in full. vaishampaayana describes its virtues krishna dvaipaayana had attained his object in three years, rising daily and purifying himself and performing his ascetic devotions he had composed this mahaabhaarata he that gives away a copy of the bhaarata to one that asks for it s indeed make a present of the whole earth with her belt of seas. vide aadivamshaavataarana . jamadagnis son, after having twenty one times destroyed the kshattriya race, began ascetic penances on the mahendra mountain. a new kshattriya caste sprang from the kshattriya ladies and the brahmans. description of the krita yuga. then the daityas being repeatedly defeated by the aadityas and deprived of heaven, the asuras began to be born on earth in such numbers that the earth became incapable of supporting herself, even with the united strength of the pannagas . the earth then applied to brahmaan, who was surrounded by gods, brahmans, great rishis, gandharvas, and apsarases. brahmaan appointed the gods, gandharvas and apsarases, to be born on earth in order to ease her of her burthen by destroying the asuras. they agreed, and going to vaikuntha they also prevailed upon naaraayana to become incarnate.
adri1, son of vishvagashva, descendant of ikshvaaku .
adrijaa, a river, .
adrikaa, an apsaras, cursed by brahmaan to become a fish when dwelling in the yamunaa river she drank the semen of uparicara, was caught by a fisherman, and gave birth to matsya and satyavati .
adrishyanti, wife of shaktri and daughter in law of vasishtha, and mother of paraashara .
adridha, son of jaraasandha .
aadya3, a tirtha upon the sarasvati .
agastya1, a rishi, brother of vasishtha and son of mitra and varuna he is called maitraavaruni and kumbhayoni he once saw his ancestors hanging in a cave, and was urged by them to procure progeny he then from the most beautiful parts of all animals created lopaamudraa and let her become the daughter of the king of vidarbha when he had married her he, in order to procure riches for her, applied successively to three kings, and then to the daanava ilvala, who shaped his own younger brother into a he goat that was digested by agastya. agastya had a son by lopaamudraa named dridhasyu or idhmavaaha. a. prevailed upon the vindhya mountain to cease to increase in height till he had returned from the south, and drunk up the sea, in order that the gods might overcome the kaalakeyas . v.s . k once the gods were vanquished by as. their sacrifices and the svadhaa of p. were robbed, and so also the sacrifices of men. wandering over the earth they met the brahman agastya, who at their request burned daa who, abaning both the worlds, fled to the south. the daa. king bali was performing a horse sacrifice in the nether regions the great as who were under and in the earth, were not burned, and a. could not destroy them, lest his penances should suffer a diminution. name thou a kshattriya that is superior to a . e, in olden days a devoted to the good of all creatures, entered into a dikshaa for twelve years many hotris were engaged . a. obtained the food required by lawful means. numerous ascetics at that time performed large sacrifices as a how ever, was engaged in his, indra did not pour rain. during the intervals of the sacrifice the mu. spoke about this a. said that if indra did not pour rain during those twelve years he would perform the mental sacrifice, or the touch sacrifice, or other sacrifices then a. by his words caused all wealth in the three worlds, all aps g ku vishvaavasu, etc the wealth of the northern kurus, heaven, the gods, and dharma, to come to the place of his sacrifice ri. praised him, but did not wish that his penances should suffer any diminution. indra poured rain and came with brihaspati and pacified a. after the completion of the sacrifice, a. duly worshipped those great mu. and dismissed them, . compare kumbhayoni, maitraavaruni, mitra varunayo putra. brihaddevataa, . ff see br.
agastya2, might allude to a brahman of agastyas race, named sharmin yet, the epithet bhagavaan naturally leads the thought upon agastya himself br. takes sharminam to be an adjective happy.
aagastya1, patron .
aagastya3, adj. saras, a tirtha .
agastyavata, a place in or near the himaalaya .
in the city of manimati there lived formerly a daiteya ilvala, whose younger brother was vaataapi . ilvala, inflamed with wrath against all brahmans, because a brahman had refused to grant him a son equal to indra, used to transform vaataapi into a ram and offer his flesh to brahmans as food, and then to recall him to life, and vaataapi, ripping the flanks of the brahmans, would come out laughing. thus they killed many brahmans. meanwhile agastya saw his ancestors hanging in a hole with the heads nwards, and was asked by them to procure offspring to them. as he did not see any wife worthy of himself, he selected the most beautiful parts from various creatures and created an excellent woman, whom he caused to be born as the daughter of the vidarbha king, who was then undergoing ascetic penances for obtaining offspring. she was named lopaamudraa, and was very beautiful. when she attained to puberty no one dared to ask for her hand . when agastya asked the vidarbha king to bestow her upon him, the king and his queen became much afflicted, but at her own request lopaamudraa was bestowed upon agastya, who im mediately asked her to discard her ornaments and dress herself in rags and barks and deer skins and partake of his vows, and proceeding to gangaadvaara they practised the severest penances. when at last he summoned her for marital intercourse she made it a condition that he should approach her on a bed like to that which she had in the palace of her father, and that both should be aned with costly ornaments, and she told him to procure these things without impairing his ascetic merit . agastya then went to king shrutarvan and asked him for wealth, but seeing that his expenditure was equal to his income, he took nothing, but, together with shrutarvan, went to king bradhnashva, with the same result then all three went to king trasadasyu paurukutsa of the line of ikshvaaku, with the same result. at the suggestion of the three kings they all four went to ilvala . ilvala went out with his ministers to receive them on the confines of his ain. he prepared the flesh of vaataapi in order to entertain them, at which the kings became sad, but agastya ate it all, and when ilvala summoned vaataapi there came only air out of agastyas stomach, vaataapi having already been digested. then ilvala, becoming sad, promised to give them wealth if agastya could tell him what he intended to give, and agastya rightly said that he intended to give each of the kings, cows and as many gold coins, and to agastya twice as much, and a car that would be found to be a golden one, with two steeds . the car brought agastya and the kings to agastyas hermitage within the twinkling of an eye. then the raajarshis went away to their cities. when agastya proposed to lopaamudraa to choose between sons, or each equal to, or each equal to, or equal to, she chose the last alternative. after she had conceived he retired into the forest. after seven years she gave birth to drdhasyu, who came out as if repeating the vedas with the upanishads and angas and from carrying, while yet a child, loads of sacrificial fuel to the hermitage of his father, he was called idhmavaaha. agastya was highly pleased, and his ancestors obtained the lokas they desired. in the krita age the daanava tribes named kaalakeyas under vritra pursued the gods under indra. the gods, on the suggestion of brahmaan, with naaraayana at their head, proceeded to the hermitage of the rishi dadhica on the other bank of sarasvati, and having prevailed upon him to leave his body, they caused tvashtri to construct of his bones the six sided vajra which tvashtri handed to indra that he might slay vritra with it . in the encounter that ensued between the gods and the kaalakeyas the gods were defeated, until naaraayana, the gods, and the brahmarshis had transferred their own vigour to indra. he then hurled the vajra against vritra and slew him so that he fell headlong like the mandara mountain hurled of yore from vishnus hand but indra fled in fear, desiring to take shelter in a lake, thinking that the vajra had not been hurled from his hand and that vritra was still alive, while the gods defeated the daanavas, who fled to the depths of the sea. here they conspired for the destruction of the three worlds, and resolved upon destroying all who were possessed of ascetic virtues, for so the universe would itself be destroyed, as it is supported by asceticism . remaining in the depths of the sea by the kaaleyas during the night slew the munis in the hermitages and sacred spots in the hermitage of vasishtha, ascetics in that of cyavana, in that of bharadvaaja, without being seen every morning people saw the dead bodies and mutilated limbs of the munis and the disturbed agnihotras scattered on the ground. men fled for their lives into all directions or killed themselves from fear. some brave bowmen searched in vain for the evilrs. the gods with indra repaired to naaraayana . they did not know by whom the brahmans were being killed during the night. vishnu explained the whole affair to them, and told them to apply to agastya that he might dry up the sea, as no one else was capable of so ng. they then went to the hermitage of agastya, and mentioned to him that he had delivered the gods from nahusha and caused vindhya to cease to increase in height, the world having been covered with darkness . vindhya . at the request of the gods agastya, accompanied by rishis, gods, men, uragas, gandharvas, yakshas, and kimpurushas, approached the ocean and drank it up, to the amazement of the gods, who called him vidhaatri and the creator of the worlds, while the musical instruments of gandharvas were playing, and celestial blossoms were showered upon him. the kaaleyas, who had previously been burnt by the tapas of the munis, were now destroyed by the gods, except some few who, rending asunder the goddess earth, sought refuge in paataala. the gods now asked agastya to fill up the ocean again, but he had already digested the water. the gods with vishnu came to brahmaan and spoke to him about replenishing the sea . brahmaan dismissed them, saying that only after a long course of time the ocean would be brought to resume its wonted state by the agnates of king bhagiratha.
agaavaha, a vrishni hero .
aghamarshana, a rishi .
aagneya2, astram. b, .
aagneya3, nakshatra .
aagneya4, ukshan. .
aagneya5, maatara. u, .
aagneya7, patron, .
aagneya8, patron, .
agni . b, . b, f. . b, identified with the sun, . c, among the names of the sun . ff . a, . g f, f, . b, etc. . a, agni says that he dwells within the bodies of all creatures. b, . shows interest for arjuna, allusion to one of arjunas preceptors in arms, . f, they with brihaspati, ushanas, m y aa s sapt vishvaamitra, aps etc worship brahmaan, deathpratijnaap.ghatotkacavadhap.samaprabhamsuraa iva nir agnayanaaraayanaastra mokshap.agnaav agnir iva nyastoyathaa jagdhvaa jagat kritsnam samaye sacaraacaramgacched agnir vibhor aasyamsuryam agni pravishta syaad yathaa caagnim divaakaravaagagnitripuraakhyaanashringam agnir babhuvaasya, i.e. on the arrow of mahaadevaagni shomau jagat kritsnamkarnap.shakraagnibhyaam iva m s r vi a agnir indrash ca somash ca pavano tha disho dashadhananja yasya te paksheshalyap.bhagavaanr ivayathaagadaayuddhap.khaandave gnim ivaarjuna broughtin, from dvaarakaa by balaraamaskandabrihaspati samid dhaagnau juhaavaagnim yathaavidhishaktyaa... dattayaa, i.e. the lance of skandabaladevat. pranashto bhagavaanindro gnir aryamaa caiva yatra praak pritim aapnuvan, i.e. on the yamunaaraajadh.hantaai.e. krishnaantarbhuta, i.e. krishnaraamop.having got alms from arjuna kaartavirya, a. burnt villages, etc and the hermitage of aapavaraajadh.v. aaditya4ajo gnir varuno mesha...na vikreya kathancana =, vibhaavasukhadgotp.aser daivatamkrtaghnop.vishve devaa saagnaya, etc repre sented by brahmans fed in the house of virupaaksha on a certain day of the kaarttika monthbhrigu bharad vaaja s.agni maarutau, spring from wateragni maaruta samyogaat tata samabhavan mahiis brahmaans tejasagni shomau tu candraarkau nayane tasya, i.e. brahmaans, vishrutebali vaasava s.aahush cainam, i.e. brahmaan, kecid agnim kecid aahu prajaapatimvritravadhain order to deliver indra from the brahmahatyaa that issued from the body of vritra, when he had been killed by indra, brahmaan divided it in four portions one fourth was taken by agni on the condition that it should immediately enter the man who should abstain from offering, etc.msnst.= shiva, namesmokshadh.agni shomaav idam sarvamv. aadityaif at death the soul escapes through the eyes, the man reaches the region of agninaaraayaniya, mahaapurushastavatavaagnir aasyam, no. kin ca brahmaa ca rudrash ca shakrash ca balabhit prabhusuryas taaraadhipo vaayur agnir varuna eva caaakaasham jagati caiva ye ca sheshaa divaukasapralayam na vijaananti aatmana pari nirmitamdigestive fire, nil.food, nil.kshattram, i.e. the kshattriyasbraahman, i.e. the brahmansbhaavayantibeinganddaughter of king duryodhana in maahishmati and the river narmadaaa brahman who, being engaged in study and regarding himself learned with the aid of his learning destroys the reputation of others, falls away from righteousness, and his regions of felicity hereafter lokaa are of short duration antavantonivaapapitaamaha, on the summit of merunarake pacyatepage0 b pitrinaam, i.e. shivapl.page0 b
agnishiras, a tirtha .
agnidhaaraa, a tirtha .
agnikanyaapura, a tirtha .
agnimat, an agni .
a part of khaandavadahanaparvan . questioned by janamejaya why agni desired to consume the forest of khaandava, vaishampaayana related it has been heard in the puraana that king shvetaki performed sacrifices so incessantly that his ritvijes left him, their eyes being afflicted with the continued smoke he then had his sacrifice completed by other ritvijes. he then desired to perform another sacrifice, which should extend over years. but he could not obtain any priests to assist him they told him to apply to rudra. he then went to kailaasa, and by observing the most rigid austerities he prevailed upon rudra that his sacrifice should be completed, on the condition that he could for twelve years without intermission pour libations of clarified butter into the fire, himself leading all the while the life of a brahmacaarin. when this had been e rudra said that he would not himself assist at the sacrifice, which properly belonged to the brahmans but he caused durvaasas to complete it. but agni became sick, because he had drunk clarified butter for twelve years, and applied to brahmaan. brahmaan told him to consume the forest of khaandava, that abode of the enemies of the gods, which he had of old once burnt to ashes at the request of the gods, together with its living population then he would regain his own nature. seven times agni, assisted by vaayu, set the forest on fire but the inhabitants extinguished the fire . a, a. agni again applied to brahmaan, who told him to solicit the old deities nara and naaraayana
agni shomau, .
agnitirtha, a tirtha on the sarasvati. b w, .
agnivesha, the teacher of drona in arms . agniveshya.
agraahya1, the great spirit .
agratirtha, a king incarnated from the krodhavasha gana .
aagrayana, an agni .
ahalyaa, the wife of the rishi gautama . d, a of spotless form, the wife of a rishi, was outraged by indra while her husband was alive violated by indrautankahas brought to her madayantis earrings by utanka
ahamkaara, etc .
ahamyaati, a king, son of samyaati and father of saarvabhauma .
ahar . u, .
ahibradhna, v. ahirbradhna.
ahirbradhna, one of the eleven rudras .
aahuka1, a yaadava prince came to yudhishthiraraajadh.aahukaakrurauaanushaasanik.raajnamausalap.at the command of a etc the manufacture of wines and spirit was forbidden
aahuka2, a tribe .
aahvaayaka, pl one of the five braahmana caandaalas .
aishvara, adj. .
aikshvaaki, a princess, wife of suhotra, and mother of ajamidha .
aila2, v. aina.
aina, a people .
aindra, adj .
aindradyumna aakhyaana .
airaavana1, the elephant of indra . airaavata.
airaavana2, a snake . airaavata.
airaavata1, the elephant of indra . b, . b, . airaavana.
airaavata2, a serpent . b, .
airaavata3, plur the serpents of airaavatas kind .
airaavata4, a varsha . on the north of shringavat and up to the border of the sea is the varsha airaavata, superior to all because of the peak . the sun gives no heat there, and the men are not subject to decay the moon with the stars is the only source of light. the men have the complexion and the fragrance of the lotus, their eyes not wink, without food, with agreeable scent, fallen from devaloka, without passions, living for, years.
airaavatapatha, the northern part of the path of the moon .
aishika, adj. .
aishika i.e. aishikaparvan.
the of the minor parvans of mhbhr aishika. the driver of dhrishtadyumnas chariot, who had managed to escape from kritavarman at a time when he was heedless, informs yudhishthira, in the morning, of the extermination of his army. yudhishthira falls n on the earth saatyaki holds him in his embrace bhima, etc stretch forth their arms. having recovered his senses yudhishthira laments and despatches nakula to bring thither draupadi and the ladies with her then he proceeds to view the slaughter in his camp, and falls n on the earth with all his followers . draupadi arrives from upaplavya, falls n in the presence of yudhishthira, is comforted by bhima, addresses yudhishthira, and resolves to sit in praaya, if the paandavas not slay ashvatthaaman. yudhishthira urged her to forget her sorrows, as ashvatthaa man is not to be found. draupadi insists on ashvatthaamans slaughter and the depredation of the gem on his head, appealing in particular to bhimasena . bhimasena, making nakula his charioteer, sets out in pursuit of ashvatthaaman, guided by the track of the latters car wheels . krishna urges yudhishthira to make arrangements for the safety of bhima, as ashvatthaaman has the brahma shiras weapon capable of exterminating all foes . the paandavas, with krishna, proceed on the track of bhima sena krishna, arjuna, and yudhishthira on krishnas car with steeds of the kaamboja breed shaibya on the right, sugriva on the left, meghapushpa and balaahaka being paarshnivaahas, the standard having been made by vishva karman and standing high like maayaa, with garuda. they in vain ask bhima to stop. they find ashvatthaaman sitting with vyaasa on the bank of gangaa in the midst of many ri. he is attired in a piece of cloth made of kusha grass, etc... he consecrates a blade of grass with mantras, and converts it into that powerful celestial weapon, and throws it off with the words for the destruction of the paandavas . urged by krishna, arjuna shoots the weapon imparted to him by drona, which was capable of neutralizing all weapons. extraordinary portents appear in nature. naarada and vyaasa, trying to save the three worlds, stand between the two fires . arjuna withdraws his weapon but ashvatthaaman is incapable of withdrawing his, as no person of uncleansed soul can bring it back, after it has once been let off, but only a brahmacaarin otherwise it strikes off his own head. vyaasa praises arjuna for not having before used the brahmashiras weapon that region where brahmashiras is baffled by another high weapon, suffers a drought for twelve years he proposes to him to give the paandavas the gem on his head then the paandavas would in return grant him his life. ashvatthaaman surrenders his gem, whose wearer ceases to have any fear from weapons, etc and from daa and n and raa. the weapon he throws into the wombs of the paandava women . krishna says that a brahman at upaplavya has said to uttaraa, while the kuru line will become extinct, a son will be born to thee, and he will for that reason be called parikshit. ashvatthaaman says that his words could not but be fulfilled. krishna says that the fลtus will die, but be recalled to a long life but ashvatthaaman shall wander for years alone, and without being able to talk to anyone the stench of pus and blood shall emanate from him, and inaccessible forests and dreary moors shall be his abode he shall wander over the earth with the weight of all diseases on him. parikshit shall learn the use of all weapons from kripa and rule the earth for sixty years krishna will revive him. vyaasa approves of krishnas curse. ashvatthaaman proceeds to the forest. the paandavas with krishna, vyaasa, and naarada, taking with them the gem, come to draupadi, who is sitting in praaya. bhima comforts draupadi . draupadi asks yudhishthira to place upon his head the gem taken from ashvatthaaman. yudhishthira asks krishna about the true cause of ashvatthaamans success in destroying the paandava army . krishna ascribes it to the aid of mahaadeva, and relates that when brahmaan, desirous of creating, saw rudra, he asked him to create living creatures rudra promised to so, and plunged into the waters and practised austerities. then brahmaan called into existence another being in order to make him the creator of living creatures, and he created daksha, etc. but they ran towards their creator from hunger, desirous of devouring him, and he repaired to brahmaan, who assigned herbs, etc as their food, and the weak beings to the strong ones. the creatures multiplied. then rudra rose from the water, became angry, and caused his productive limb to disappear in the earth. he had created food for all these creatures. then he went away, in cheerlessness and rage, to the munjavat mountains in order to practise severer austerities . after the krita age the gods prepared a sacrifice, but not knowing rudra truly they assigned no share to him. rudra constructed a bow of two of the four kinds of sacrifices, and came as a brahmacaarin to the sacrifice the earth shrank with fear, etc. rudra pierced the sacrifice in the heart it assumed the shape of a deer and fled away with agni, pursued by rudra through the skies the gods were stupefied rudra with his bow broke the arms of savitri and plucked out the eyes of bhaga and the teeth of pushan the gods uttered a cry the string of his bow burst the gods and the sacrifice gratified rudra he threw his wrath into the water that wrath, assuming the form of fire, is always employed in consuming the water. he then gave unto savitri his arms, to bhaga his eyes, and to pushan his teeth, and restored the sacrifice. the gods assigned to him all the libations of clarified butter as his share .
aja6, son of jahnu .
aja7, a king, .
aja8, adj .
aja9, plur a kind of rishis .
aajagaraparvan . the paandavas spent four years with arjuna in the gardens of kubera, which added to the preceding six make ten years of exile. in the eleventh year yudhishthira, advised by bhima, took leave of those regions, determining again to practise austerities on the mountain, when he had regained his king and after lomasha had returned to the abode of the gods, they with the brahmans proceeded along that very road, carried by ghatotkaca and his followers, and advised also by aarshtishena . having crossed kailaasa, they passed one night in the hermitage of king vrishaparvan, then one month at badari, seeing kuberas favourite lake, then crossing the land of cina, tushaara, darada, and all the regions of kulinda, and the difficult himaalaya regions, they reached the city of the kiraata king subaahu, where they met with their charioteers vishoka, etc and their servants mahendrasena, etc the cooks and servants of the kitchen. after having stayed there one night, they, dismissing ghatotkaca and his followers, with the charioteers and chariots reached the king of mountains near yamunaa, where they dwelt for one year, occupied with hunting, in the forest vishaakhayupa. there in a cavern bhima was seized by a snake and rescued by yudhishthira. in the twelfth year of their exile they repaired thence to the borders of the desert, and desirous of dwelling by the sarasvati, they went there, and thence reached the lake of dvaitavana . at the request of janamejaya, vaishampaayana detailed how bhima, when they had come from the raajarshi vrishaparvans hermitage, was hunting with unpoisoned arrows on some spots of himavat, was seized by a huge snake, and on account of a boon that had been granted to the serpent was quite unable to extricate himself . the serpent said that he was the raajarshi nahusha, the son of aayu, whom agastya had cursed to become a serpent, out of compassion, however, adding to his curse that the person who would be able to answer his questions would deliver him, and that even stronger beings would, when seized by him, lose their strength. he had retained his recollection of his former existence, and nobody who came within his reach at the sixth division of the day could escape him. bhima lamented. now appeared dreadful omens to yudhishthira there, and having learnt from draupadi that bhima had long been out, he set out with dhaumya, having directed arjuna to protect draupadi, and nakula and sahadeva to protect the brahmans and in the east, following the tracks of bhima, he came to the spot . the serpent told yudhi shthira who he was, refused other food instead of bhima, but promised to deliver him if yudhishthira could answer his questions. the first question was about the characteristics of the brahman, etc. . yudhishthira asked the serpent some questions about the means of salvation, and some other moral and philosophical questions, about the difference between the mind and the intellect, and what had caused nahushas fall. nahusha told that in heaven he used to exact tribute from brah marshis, gods, raakshasas, gandharvas, yakshas, pannagas, etc. and that such was the spell of his eyes, that on whatever creature he fixed them he instantly destroyed its power agastya had foretold that yudhishthira would save him from his curse. he delivered bhima unhurt, and, assuming his celestial shape, went back to heaven. yudhi shthira returned with dhaumya and bhima, and narrated all that to the brahmans, who censured bhima, and warned him against attempting such things again .
aajagava1, the bow of prithu vainya .
aajagava2, arjunas bow .
aajagava3, maandhaatris bow .
ajaikapaad, one of the rudras, sons of sthaanu .
ajaka, an asura incarnated as shaalva .
ajamidha, an ancient king .
aajamidha8, plur .
ajeya, an ancient king .
ajita1, an ancient king b.
aajyapaa . b, .
aakaasha gangaa . in the neighbourhood of the mandara mountain, the abode of the gods and rishis coming from badari, honoured by vaihaayasas and vaalakhilyas and gandharvas and singers of saamans there marici, pulaha, bhrigu, and angiras, with the host of m mutter their daily prayers s a the moon, the sun, the stars, and planets circumambulate it shiva carries its water on his head at gangaadvaara. according to the counsel of lomasha the paandavas aed it, and then continued their journey with the hosts of rishis . b, svargaarohanap.
akampana, a king in days of old there was a king named akampana. once, on the field of battle, he was surrounded by his foes. his son hari was at last slain in the midst of the army. a. grieved day and night. then the . ri. naarada came and told him the origin of death . therefore, said naarada, t indulge in fruitless grief for creatures after they are dead... akampana felt consoled, and naarada went to the woods of nandana.
akarkara, a serpent .
aakrishta, plur a sort of rishis .
akritavrana, a follower of parashu raama . b, a. had followed raama jaama dagnya and been an eye witness of all his deeds in former days .
akshauhini, an army of a certain kind and magnitude etc etc.
akshina, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
alakaa, the city and tank of kubera .
alamba . b, with divine trees, with golden boughs, and others with fruits of gold and silver and branches of precious gems.
alambusha, a raakshasa, variously genealogized and pre sumably ultimately identical with other similar figures . the raakshasa, aarshyashringa, who kills iraavat, is alambusha .
alambushaa, an apsaras .
alarka1, a raajarshi . b, e, . the pitris said r. ri. alarka, having with his bow conquered the whole earth, set his mind on what is subtle he said my mind has become strong having conquered the mind, ones conquest becomes permanent shall shoot sharp pointed arrows at the mind. the mind said these arrows will never pierce me, but only slay thyself thou look out for other arrows with which to destroy me and so also with the nose, the tongue, etc. then he set himself to penances, but failed to obtain fit arrows. he engaged in yoga, and now slew all the senses with one arrow. he complained that he in courting sovereignty till now there is no happiness higher than yoga.
alarka2, a worm .
alaataakshi, a maatri. u, .
alaayudha, a raakshasa .
alinda, pl a people in bharata varsha .
alolupa, son of dhritaraashtra . = the sun, .
alulupa, v. alolupa.
amaahatha, a serpent .
amara1, pl the gods, etc. sing etc.
amaradvisha, the asuras, .
amaraavati, the city of indra amaraavati was the resort of siddhas and caaranas, and the nandana garden of the troops of the apsarases. the region cannot be seen by those who have not gone through ascetic austerities, etc .
amatsyaashin, son of vishvaamitra .
amaavasi, the day of the new moon .
amaavasu, son of pururavas and urvashi .
ambaa, the eldest daughter of the king of kaashi, chosen by the saubha king, carried off by bhishma to be married to vicitravirya, but released refused by the saubha king, etc reborn as shikhandin .
ambaajanman, a tirtha .
ambaalikaa, . shaantanr kaushalya kaashiraaja vicitravirya ambikaa. ambaalikaavyaasa . ambaa. dhritaraashtra . paandu . kausalyaa.
ambarisha1, an ancient king bis b, . a. n. fought alone against, kings, who were reduced to subjection, and he, conquering the whole earth, performed sacrifices, etc. in those sacrifices he as sacrificial presents gave the kings of hundreds and thousands of kings to his, of priests, and numbers of princes and kings with their treasuries, etc . b, . b, .
ambarisha2, a naaga .
ambashtha1, pl a people .
ambashtha2, the ambashtha king .
ambashthaka, a king .
ambhoruha, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
ambikaa, sister of ambaalikaa . kausalyaa.
ambikaa, an apsaras .
ambikaa, a maatri. u, .
ambopaakhyaana i.e. ambopaakhyaanaparvan.
. . questioned by duryodhana why he would not slay shikhandin, bhishma said after shaantanus death and citraangadas demise, obedient to the counsels of satyavati installed, according to the ordinance, vicitravirya as king. repaired on a single car to the svayamvara of the daughters of the king of kaashi ambaa, ambikaa, and ambaalikaa, who were viryashalkaa. challenging all the kings, took the three maidens upon my car, and repeatedly told my name to the kings, and vanquished them all. then came back to haastinapura and made over those maidens, intending them for vicitravirya, to satyavati . satyavati became very glad. when the nuptials approached, ambaa said that she had before mentally chosen the shaalva king as her lord, and that he, without her fathers knowledge, had privately proposed to her . then laid the matter before satyavati and our counsellors, ritvijes, and purohitas, and permitted ambaa to depart. she came to the city of the shaalva king, escorted by a number of old brahmans, accompanied by her nurse. but he would no longer have her as his wife, because she was to be wedded to another. it was of no avail that she declared she had been carried away by force, weeping and against her will for shaalva was in terror of bhishma. she cursed bhishma, her father, herself, shaalva, and dhaatri . she resolved that her vengeance should fall upon bhishma. she repaired to a hermitage of ascetics, and stayed there that night. there was the great brahman shaikhaavatya, a preceptor in the scriptures and the aaranyakas . the ascetics counselled her to repair to her fathers abode but she would not, lest she should be slighted by her relatives she wished to practise ascetic austerities. then came her maternal grandfather, the srinjaya king, the r. ri. hotravaahana, and advised her to go to raama jaamadagnya, who would slay bhishma in battle if bhishma did not obey his behest he always dwelt on the mahendra mountain with ri g and aps. while they were speaking there appeared akritavrana, a dear companion of raama he said that raama would come the next morning to see hotravaahana hotravaahana related the history of ambaa to akritavrana . the next day raama appeared with his disciples, his bow in hand, etc. . ambaa asked him to slay bhishma . raama said he would not take up arms except at the command of brahmans. akritavrana supported the demand of ambaa. the next morning they all set out for kurukshetra with the maiden, and quartered themselves on the banks of sarasvati. on the third day raama sent a message to bhishma, who came and worshipped him. raama demanded that he should bestow ambaa upon vicitravirya, which bhishma refused. raama threatened to slay him in battle bhishma said that raama had himself taught him the four kinds of arms and quoted a shloka in the puraana, sung by marutta . having first gone to haastinapura and represented everything to satyavati, bhishma set out for kurukshetra on his car . gangaa in vain endeavoured to make them desist . bhishma asked raama to mount on a chariot but raama said that the earth was his chariot, the vedas his steeds, the wind his charioteer, and the mothers of the vedas his harness. bhishma saw him stationed on an excellent car, with akritavrana as his charioteer. bhishma propitiated raama by worshipping him, on foot. the combat lasted for many days at last bhishma, from pity and reverence, would not strike raama any longer, and the combat ceased at sunset . next morning the battle was taken up again. bhishmas vaayavya weapon was neutralized by raamas guhyaka bhishmas aagneya by raamas vaaruna. at a momentary swoon of bhishma, akritavrana, ambaa, etc were filled with joy then raama fell into a swoon and dropped n the ascetics and ambaa comforted him. a conflagration was caused in the welkin. at evening raama withdrew . the next day they fought again, and at evening they desisted . the next day bhishmas charioteer was slain bhishma, pierced by an arrow, fell n to the earth eight brahmans supported him on their arms in mid air gangaa was seen on his car she had controlled his steeds in the combat. bhishma dismissed her and fought till evening. when raama for a moment lost his consciousness, raahu enveloped the sun, etc. at evening the battle ceased next day it was taken up again, and lasted for twenty three days . during the night the above mentioned eight brahmans appeared to bhishma in a dream, comforted him, and said that the weapon prasvaapa would come to his knowledge, for it had been known to him in his former life neither raama nor any person on earth was acquainted with it raama would not be slain by it, but he would fall asleep then thou wilt awaken him with the weapon sambodhana . next day akritavrana must comfort raama. bhishma and raama both used the braahma weapon the welkin seemed to be ablaze, and as ri g and raa. were greatly afflicted, etc. then the mantras for using the prasvaapa weapon suddenly came to bhishmas mind . voices in the sky and naarada forbade him to let off the prasvaapa weapon against raama, and the above mentioned brahmans supported the words of naarada. beholding the prasvaapa weapon withdrawn, raama declared himself to be vanquished. raama then beheld before him his father and fathers father, who forbade him any more to fight with kshattriyas, especially with bhishma, whom the gods forbade to fight with raama. arjuna has been ordained by svayambhu to be the slayer of bhishma. the ascetics with ricika, naarada, gangaa, and the pitris succeeded in bringing about peace the above mentioned eight brahmans ordered. bhishma to go to raama, who, summoning ambaa, said that he could no more for her. ambaa went away, resolved to devote herself to austerities, that she might herself slay bhishma. raama with the ascetics departed for the mahendra mountain bhishma entered haastinapura, and was blessed by satyavati, and he appointed spies to ascertain the ngs of ambaa. bhishma became afflicted when he heard that she was resolved on ascetic austerities, but was consoled by naarada and vyaasa. after having lived for six months on air she stood a year in the waters of yamunaa, etc and thus went on for twelve years. she then went into vatsabhumi, etc. . gangaa, angry because she observed these vows for the destruction of bhishma, cursed her, saying that after death she would become a river crooked in her course, etc. when ambaa once more came back to vatsabhumi she there became the above mentioned river, but in con sequence of her ascetic merit, only with half her body, while as to the other half she remained a maiden as before . to the ascetics in vatsabhumi she said that she was resolved to obtain manhood in order to be revenged on bhishma. shiva appeared in his own form in the midst of those great rishis, and promised her that she would slay bhishma and even obtain manhood, and in a new body remember all the incidents born in the race of drupada, she would become a mahaaratha. then shiva disappeared. ambaa burnt herself on the bank of the yamunaa in the very sight of those great rishis . questioned by duryodhana how shikhandin, having before been born a girl, afterwards became a man, bhishma related the eldest queen of king drupada was childless. during those years drupada worshipped shankara for the sake of offspring, resolving to bring about bhishmas destruction, and practising the austerest of penances. he begged shiva for a son shiva said he should have a child who would be both female and male. in due time the queen conceived, and gave birth to a daughter, whom drupada gave out for a son, and called her shikhandin. bhishma alone, from his spies and from naarada, knew the truth . in arrows and weapons she became a disciple of drona. they afterwards wedded her to the daughter of the dashaarna king hiranyavarman, quite assured that the words of shiva would become true. shikhandin, after marriage, came back to kaampilya. at the discovery of shikhandins sex a war was about to break out with hiranyavarman . drupada was not naturally courageous, and became filled with fear, and, in the presence of others, asked his queen about the truth . the queen said that, childless as she was, when her daughter shikhandini was born she had, from fear of her co wives, told drupada that it was a son, remembering the words of shiva. drupada prepared for war, and, with the queen, prayed to the gods. shikhandini went to a forest, the haunt of the powerful yaksha sthunaakarna, who was a follower of kubera, resolved on putting an end to her own life. repeatedly requested by sthunaakarna to ask a boon, she told him the matter, and wished to become a man, as long as hiranyavarman had not left the city . he gave her his manhood and took her womanhood for a certain period, i.e. till hiranyavarman should have departed. shikhandin went home and informed drupada, who with his wife recollected the words of shiva. hiranyavarman sent a brahman as an envoy to kaampilya, threatening to ex terminate drupada with his counsellors, sons, etc. drupada sent a brahman as his envoy to hiranyavarman, maintaining that shikhandin was a male let it be made clear by means of witnesses somebody has spoken falsely to thee. hiranya varman despatched a number of young ladies for ascertaining it, and they attested that he was a male. hiranyavarman then passed some days with drupada in gladness, gave much wealth to shikhandin, and then departed, having rebuked his daughter. kubera, hearing the matter from the yakshas, cursed sthunaakarna, saying that his femininity should remain as it was as the yakshas began to soften him, he set a limit to the curse, i.e. shikhandins death. when shikhandin came to redeem his pledge, sthunaakarna related his curse and let him go. drupada gave shikhandin as a pupil to drona, who taught him the fourfold dhanurveda, along with the dhaartaraashtras and dhrishtadyumna. it was ambaa who had been born as shikhandin. bhishma had made a vow not to shoot weapons against a woman, or one that had before been a woman, or one bearing a feminine name, or one whose form resembled that of a woman . duryodhana asked in what time bhima, etc could annihilate the hostile army. bhishma said he could it in a month drona said the same kripa men tioned two months ashvatthaaman, ten nights karna, five nights. bhishma ridiculed karna, saying that he will think otherwise when he had encountered arjuna and krishna . having learnt this from his spies, yudhishthira asked arjuna the same question. arjuna said that with krishna as his ally he could exterminate the three worlds with the gods, etc in the twinkling of an eye the weapon given him by pashupati as a hunter, which pashupati used at the end of the yuga for destroying created things, was not known to bhishma, etc. he enumerated yudhishthiras allies yudhishthira was himself competent to exterminate the three worlds . next morning, under a cloudless sky, the kaurava army marched to the field, first vinda, etc. ashvatthaaman, etc in the second division in the rear, kritavarman, etc with the dhaartaraashtras at their head. duryodhanas encampment looked like a second haastinapura . in the same way yudhishthira also ordered out his troops, headed by dhrishtadyumna, under dhrishtaketu, etc first abhimanyu, etc. then bhima and arjuna in the second division last of all himself with viraata and drupada, etc. then he disposed his divisions in a different order, confounding the dhaartaraa shtras the draupadeyas, etc under bhimasena in the middle division, viraata, etc. in that part where yudhi shthira himself was, cekitaana, etc. . yudhishthira was followed by saucitti, etc .
ambumati, a river .
ambuvica karna spoke con temptuously of bhishma and drona, saying that everyones happiness depended on destiny and not on his friends, etc mentioning the magadha king ambuvica at raajagriha, whose affairs were in the hands of his minister mahaakarni, himself never attending to them his minister appropriated everything belonging to the king, but he did not succeed in acquiring the king.
amsha, one of the aadityas . u, a, . surya.
amshumat1, a king .
amshumat2, the sons son of king sagara .
amshumat3, a bhoja king .
amshumat4, one of the vishvedevas .
amitaashanaa, a maatri. u, .
amitadhvaja, an ancient king .
amitaujas, a king a, .
amogha1, a fire .
amogha2, a yaksha .
amoghaa, a maatri. u, .
amrita1, ambrosia . u, .
amritaa, a maagadha princess, wife of anashvan .
. aastikaparvan. once the gods having assembled on the summit of mount meru, naaraayana told brahmaan to churn the ocean with the gods and the asuras, in order to obtain amrita . vishnu and brahmaan prevailed upon ananta, the prince of snakes, to bring up the mountain mandara. the gods having obtained from the ocean the permission to churn it, indra placed mandara on the back of the tortoise king mandara was made the churning staff and vaasuki the cord, the asuras holding him by the hood and the gods by the tail, while ananta, who sided with naaraayana, at intervals raised the snakes hood and suddenly lowered it. black vapours with flames issued from vaasukis mouth, etc. after some churning the gums of various trees and herbs mingled with the waters of the ocean, and the milky water produced clarified butter, but even then the amrita did not appear. the gods were tired and repaired to brahmaan, who prevailed upon naaraayana to grant the gods new strength to churn afresh. after a while the moon, shri, suraadevi, ucchai shravas, and kaustubha came forth on the side of the gods then dhanvantari with a white vessel of amrita in his hand then airaavana, and at last the poison kaalakuta, that shiva, solicited by brahmaan, swallowed for the safety of the creation from that time shiva is called nilakantha . the asuras preparing to rob the gods of shri and the amrita, naaraayana, assisted by his maayaa, assumed a ravishing female form the daanavas and daityas were infatuated, and placed the amrita in her hands . while the daityas and daanavas pursued the gods, vishnu with nara let the gods drink of the amrita the daanava raahu also drank of it in the disguise of a god, but was discovered by surya and soma then naaraayana instantly seized his discus and cut off his head, which to this day swallows surya and soma. in a dreadful battle on the shores of the salt water sea the gods, headed by naaraayana with his discus sudarshana and nara with his celestial bow, discomfited the asuras, who entered the bowels of the earth or plunged into the sea of salt waters. the gods replaced mandara on its own base, and, headed by indra, they entrusted the keeping of the vessel of amrita to kiritin, .
amritapa1, a daanava .
amurtarayas, an ancient king .
amurtarayasa1, an ancient king .
anaadhrishti3, son of dhritaraashtra .
anaadhrishya, a son of dhritaraashtra .
anagha2, a deva gandharva .
anagha6, a suparna, son of garuda .
anala1, one of the eight vasus, son of prajaapati or dharma and shaandili, and father of skanda. see agni, vishnu, krishna, shiva.
anala2, a suparna, son of garuda .
aananda1, one of the warriors of skanda. u, .
ananga1, son of kardama .
ananta1, the prince of snakes . shesha.
ananta2, a warrior of skandas. u, .
ananta3ff. = krishna, vishnu, shiva, mahaapurusha, naaraayana, the sun .
anantaa, a maadhava princess, wife of purus son janamejaya .
anantabhoga . see also mahaapurusha.
anantavijaya, the conch of yudhishthira . vi, .
aanartta1, pl a people .
aanartta2, sg chief of the aanarttas .
anavadyaa, an apsaras .
anaayush, erratum for danaayus.
andaja . b, andaje janmani
andha, pl a people, presumably for andhaka .
andhaka1, pl a people .
andhaka2, an asura killed by rudra .
andhaka bhoja .
andhakaaraka, a mountain in krauncadvipa .
aandhra, pl a people . andhrakaa.
andhrakaa, a people . andhra.
anenas, son of aayus and svarbhaanavi .
anga1, pl a people descended from anga . c, .
anga3 dirghatamas sudeshnaa anga, vanga, kalinga, pundra, suhma .
anga4 cf etc. . b, .
anga5. b, .
anga6. c, .
anga7, the anga king at the time of yudhishthira . angaputra.
anga8, the anga country or adj .
anga9, one or the other of the anga kings of the past .
anga1, neut. pl. = vedaangaani, .
angada1, a monkey chief, son of vaalin .
angada2, son of dhritaraashtra . caarucitraangada.
angaaraka1, the planet mars . bhauma.
angaaraka3, a sauvira prince .
aangarishtha, an ancient king .
anghrika, son of vishvaamitra .
aangi, an ancient queen, wife of ariha and mother of mahaabhauma .
angiras1, one of the maharshis, brahmaans spiritual sons .
angiras2, pl the descendants of angiras . u, .
aangirasa9, pl the descendants of angiras . atharvan.
aangirasa1 . c, . b, . j, .
angirasaka, adj .
aangirasopaakhyaana, v. aangirasa1.
anikavidaarana, brother of jayadratha .
anila1 . u, . vaayu.
anila3, a suparna, son of garuda .
anila, a serpent .
anilasambhava, v. agni.
anilasaarathi, v. agni.
animaandavya the rishi animaandavya having been accused of theft, though innocent, and impaled, as a punishment for having in his childhood pierced a little fowl in a reed, cursed dharma, saying that he should be born on earth in the shudra caste. therefore dharma was born as vidura, .
animaandavyopaakhyaana. the history of maandavya is more fully described. suspicion had fallen upon him, because thieves had hid their plunder in his hermitage, while he was sitting for years with his arms upraised observing the vow of silence. when impaled, he by his ascetic power not only preserved his life, but summoned other rishis to the scene, who came in the night in the shape of birds . hearing that he was alive, the king asked his par and endeavoured to extract the stake from his body, but was obliged to cut it off outside the body. maandavya henceforth walked about with the stake in his life, and thereby conquered lokas unattainable by others and was called animaandavya . he ruled that an act should not be sinful when committed by one below the age of years .
animisha1, a suparna .
aniruddha1 . b, .
anjana1, a locality, .
anjana2, an elephant . anjanaka
anjanaabha, a mountain .
antakaala . u, .
antakrit. u, .
antaradvipa, pl. .
antardhaaman. b, .
antardhaana, a celestial weapon. c, .
antarikshacara, pl . ff, .
antevasaayin, son of a nishaadi and a caandaala, .
anu, son of yayaati . e, yayaati cursed his older sons anu should be overcome by decrepitude and not be able to perform sacrifices before agni, and his progeny should die as soon as they attained to youth, his sons were the mlecchaa, .
anucakra, a companion of skanda. u, .
anucaanaa, an apsaras .
anucara, pl. . u, .
anudara, son of dhritaraashtra .
anudaatta, a fire .
anudyutaparvan. when the paandavas had left haastinapura with all their wealth and jewels, dushaasana complained of it to duryodhana, who, with karna and shakuni, quoting the words of brihaspati when counselling indra about politics, and declaring that the paandavas would certainly revenge themselves, prevailed upon dhritaraashtra to invite them a second time to a match of gambling between yudhishthira and shakuni, on the condition that the defeated party should repair to the woods for twelve years, dressed in deer skins, and spend the thirteenth year in some inhabited country unrecognized, and if recognized, be exiled for another twelve years. if the paandavas should succeed in observing this vow for thirteen years, the dhaartaraashtras would in the meantime have made alliances and have assembled an invincible army, so that they could defeat them if they reappeared. drona, somadatta, baahlika, gautama, vidura, ashvatthaaman, vaishyaaputra, bhurishravas, bhishma, and vikarna dissuaded in vain . gaandhaari reminded dhritaraashtra of the counsel vidura had given, when duryo dhana was born, to kill him, and recommended him to it now, and not to let the gambling match take place, saying that it would cause the destruction of the whole race of the kurus. but dhritaraashtra could not act contrary to the will of his sons . the royal messengers overtook yudhishthira when he had already gone a long way. yudhishthira having said, although a golden animal was an impossibility, raama suffered himself to be tempted by a golden deer, they returned. the gambling began on the above mentioned conditions, and yudhishthira lost . the paandavas, casting off their royal robes, attired themselves in deer skins. dushaasana exulted, and exhorted krishnaa to aban the fallen paandavas and choose a husband among the kurus. as bhima rebuked him and threatened to slay him with his followers, dushaasana, dancing around, said, o cow o cow bhishma again swore to drink his blood and to kill all the dhaartaraashtras. as the paandavas were going away, duryodhana mimicked the tread of bhima, who then said will slay duryodhana with my mace, and place my foot on his head. dhananjaya will slay karna, and sahadeva will slay shakuni, and will drink the blood of dushaasana. arjuna and sahadeva approved of it. nakula, the handsomest of men, vowed to kill all the dhaartaraashtras that had insulted draupadi . yudhishthira bids farewell to bhishma, somadatta, baahlika, drona, kripa, ashvatthaaman, vidura, dhritaraashtra, the dhaartaraashtras yuyutsu, sanjaya, etc. vidura kept prithaa in his abode, and consoled yudhishthira formerly thou wast instructed on the himavat by meru saavarni, in vaaranaavata by dvaipaayana, on bhrigutunga by raama, on the drishadvati by shambhu, near anjana by the great rishi asita, by bhrigu on the banks of kalmaashi naarada always beholds thee, and this dhaumya is thy purohita, resolve to win victory like indra, to control thy wrath like yama, to give in charity like kuvera, to control all passions like varuna. so yudhishthira went away, bowing to bhishma and drona, . when krishnaa took leave of kunti, kunti broke out in complaints, and especially recommended her ever to keep her eye on sahadeva. when kunti beheld her sons clad in deer skins, surrounded by rejoicing foes, she embraced them and broke out in com plaints, asking why krishna, who dwells in dvaarakaa, and is without beginning and without end, s not deliver them from such woe. o sahadeva cease to go thou art my dearest child, o son of maadri the paandavas, having consoled her, set out for the woods, and vidura led her to his house. the ladies of dhritaraashtras house wept, blaming the kauravas and dhritaraashtra, anxious, sent for vidura . questioned by dhritaraashtra, vidura described the attitude of the paandavas, etc when going away . the citizens cried out in grief, blaming the kurus. flashings of lightning and other terrible omens appeared. naarada appeared, surrounded by great rishis, and foreboded that on the fourteenth year thence the kauravas would all be destroyed by bhima and arjuna. then he disappeared through the skies. duryodhana, karna, and shakuni offered the king to drona, who said that the paandavas were incapable of being slain that they would practise the brahmacarya for twelve years, and then return in anger that he would protect the dhaartaraashtras, who had sought his pro tection, to the best of his ability but that he would himself be slain by dhrishtadyumna, whom drupada had obtained from the fire by the ascetic power of yaaja and upayaaja it is widely known in the world that dhrishtadyumna will slay drona. dhritaraashtra sent vidura to bring the paandavas back, or, if they did not come back, to send them off with respect, with their weapons, cars, and infantry, etc. . sanjaya spoke to dhritaraashtra about the perversity of his policy. dhritaraashtra related that when krishnaa was dragged into the court the grief was so great that the enraged brahmans did not that evening perform their agnihotra he also related the omens which had appeared on the occasion, etc. .
the of the minor parvans of mhbhr. anugitaai.e. bhagavadgitaasiddhamkramamaanamcakradharai, pcr prakritim, arjunapage0 b nityayuktasya, braahmanagitaab, g, his maternal uncle his maternal aunt, omensb, description the trees looked like the kalpa trees of indras garden the mountain looked like meru, page0 a, i.e. rohini, nil.i.e. sunday, nil descriptioni.e. dhaumya, nil descriptionwith krisharas, and meat, and nivaapas mixed with sesame seeds descriptionfour miles, pcr description with articles destructive of raa tena satyena, page0 b etymologydescription, with the permission of dhritaraashtra, description, the sons and grandsons of the slain, description, jepu, page0 a the son of jayadrathaorphanorphan, step description of his car, touching water, approved by gangaawhile he was engaged with shikhandin and had ceased to fightdvijaatipariveshakapage0 b, b. kolla, description, having heard it from a confidential agent of his in dvaarakaa, description page0 a, and ulupi description, b. cookingheart, tongue, breast, etc nil. caaturhotrapramaanata pcr. according to what is e in the caaturhotra sacrificethe price of the earth description, b, truepage0 b, ev. nakulaakhyaana
anugoptri, a vishvadeva .
anuhlaada, son of hiranyakashipu . daitya.
anukampaka. b, . bhishma said in the krita age king anukampaka had been brought under the sway of his foes in battle, and his son hari, who was like naaraayana himself, had been slain in that battle with all his followers and troops. the king devoted himself to a life of tranquillity. naarada told him mrityuprajaapatisamvaada . .
anukarman, a vishvadeva .
anukramani, the first chapter of mahaabhaarata, perhaps also the second, . compare anu kramanikaadhyaaya parvaanukramani.
anukramanikaadhyaaya, anukramani, .
the first of the minor parvans . the suta ugrashravas, son of lomaharshana, had heard the mahaabhaarata, which had been composed by vyaasa, recited under the direction of dvai paayana himself by vaishampaayana, disciple of vyaasa, at the serpent sacrifice of king janamejaya, son of parikshit he had thereupon undertaken a pilgrimage to the tirthas and visited samantapancaka thence he came to the twelve years sattra of shaunaka in the naimisha forest, where he related the mahaabhaarata, beginning with the aation of vishnu identified with the absolute, and a brief exposition of the creation and succession of beings from the absolute through brahmaan, the prajaapatis, gods, etc n to the families of the kurus, etc mentioned in the poem. the mahaabhaarata contains an enlarged and an abridged form some make it begin with manu, some with aastika, and some with uparicara . vyaasa had composed the mahaabhaarata in a moment, and, at the counsel of brahmaan, had ganesha to write it n as fast as he dictated to him. the portion destined for men he taught vaishampaayana, who narrated it in the intervals between the parts of the serpent sacrifice of janamejaya, first giving a survey of the principal contents, partly in the form of a conversation between dhritaraashtra and sanjaya. sanjaya, in order to console dhritaraashtra, first enumerated great kings, who were formerly mentioned by naarada to shaivya when lamenting the loss of a son, and thereupon others, who had all died. he, who hears or reads the mahaabhaarata, is purified from the most atrocious sins .
anumati. u, .
anupadesha . f, .
anuraadhaa, a nakshatra .
anuvinda1 . anuvinda3.
anuvinda2, a kaikeya prince .
anuvinda3, son of dhritaraashtra .
anuyaayin, a son of dhritaraashtra .
anyagocaraa, a maatri. u, .
aapa, a fire .
aapaddharma i.e. aapaddharmaparvan.
. yudhishthira enquired of bhishma what should be e by a weak and timid king, as also by one that is in great distress. bhishmas answer recommending peace and even the surrender of territory. the king should never surrender his person as long as he can avoid ng so. if the invading enemy be righteous, the assailed king should make peace if otherwise, the assailed should fight bravely and fall . how a brahman should subsist in times of calamity. bhishma began his exposition of the moral standard of unlucky times in times of calamity the king may take from the wicked and give it to the good at such times censurable acts not become censurable the king should never oppress brahmans, even at such times. slander should be avoided. the tests of righteousness difficulty in finding the course of duty. some regard ancient usage as the highest test of righteousness they that are in favour of the conduct of cankha towards likhita not hold this opinion . how a king should fill his treasury. the king should establish laws which he should never transgress . the two duties of a kshattriya are the acquisition of religious merit and of wealth. the advantages of power . the old story of a robber who having in this world been observant of restraint did not meet with destruction in the next kaayavya carita . what wealth should not be taken by the king . who enjoy happiness shaakulopaakhyaana . . how a king should behave who is weak and threatened on all sides by powerful foes the old story of the mouse, the cat, the owl, the mongoose, and the hunter, i.e. maarjaara mushika samvaada . the moral of the story . bhishma related the conversation between the bird pujani and king brahmadatta, i.e. brahmadatta pujani samvaada . how a king should behave when there is a general decadence of righteousness the old story of the discourse between bhaaradvaaja and king shatrunjaya, i.e. kanikopadesha . how a brahman should live when there is terrible distress around. bhishma said that the krita, etc are all dependent on the kings conduct, citing the old story of the discourse between vishvaamitra and the caandaala in a hamlet inhabited by caandaalas. towards the end of tretaa and the beginning of dvaapara a frightful drought occurred extending over twelve years the planet brihaspati began to move in a retrograde course, and soma receded towards the south, etc. the brahmans abstained from sacrifices and recitations of the vedas, and no longer uttered vashats, etc. the very rishis, giving up their vows, began to wander hither and thither. m. ri. vishvaamitra, leaving his wife and son, wandered fireless and homeless, and regardless of food, clean and unclean. one day he came upon a hamlet, in the midst of a forest, inhabited by cruel hunters, etc. . vishvaamitra, in rage of hunger, wanted to steal a s haunch . he was discovered and harshly addressed by the owner but when the caandaala learned who he was he addressed him respectfully, and dissuaded him from eating s meat, as the is less clean than a jackal, and the haunch of a is much worse than other parts of his body only the five kinds of five clawed animals are clean food for brahmans and kshattriyas and vaishyas, as laid n in the scriptures . vishvaamitra said that it is the duty of the brahmans to behave like agni, that the vedas are fire, and that fire at times becomes a consumer of everything life is better than death if living one may acquire virtue he mentioned that agastya, when hungry, ate up the asura vaataapi . notwithstanding the warnings of the caandaala, vishvamitra took away that haunch of s meat into the woods and wished to eat it with his wife, having gratified the gods and the pitris igniting a fire according to the braahma rites and cooking a caru according to the aindraagneya rites, dividing the caru into due portions, he invoked the gods, including indra. meanwhile indra began to pour rain copiously. vishvaamitra, having completed the rites, himself ate that meat. afterwards he destroyed all his sins by his penances and acquired the most wonderful success . yudhishthira was distressed at the possibility of such acts of impiety being mentioned as a duty. bhishma said that kings should gather wis from various sources, and not from the vedas alone. those who blame the injunctions of the scriptures, etc are hucksters in learning and raakshasas among men it has been heard by us that the texts of morality cannot be understood solely by discussion or by ones own intellect indra has said that this is the opinion of brihaspati... in days of old ushanas told the daiteyas this truth, that scriptures are no scriptures if they cannot stand the test of reason...the sin of killing a person is equal to the sin of not killing one that deserves to be killed. indra has said that in times of distress the great duty of a king is chastising the wicked and protecting the good . yudhishthira enquired after the merits of protecting suppliants. bhishma, reminded of shibi, etc told the story that bhaargava had recited to king mucukunda, how a pigeon won success, i.e. kapota lubdhaka samvaada . requested by yudhishthira about how a person can be purified after having committed sin from want of judgment, bhishma related the old tale, applauded by ri of what the brahman indrota shaunaka said to janamejaya, i.e. indrota paarikshitiya . asked by yudhishthira if he had ever seen or heard of any mortal restored to life after having succumbed to death, bhishma related the story of the discourse between a vulture and a jackal as it had happened of old in the forest of naimisha, i.e. gridhra gomaayu samvaada . yudhishthira asked bhishma as to how a weak king who incurs the wrath of a powerful one should behave in the hour of danger. bhishma told the story of the discourse between pavana and the shaalmali, who, having dared the wind god, saved himself by causing his branches to be lopped off pavana shaalmali samvaada . one should over look the wrongs inflicted by a person of superior strength, and even consider them like the acts of a child, an idiot, or one that is blind or deaf. the eighteen akshauhinis were not equal in might to arjuna . covetousness is the cause of sin it is not known in its real nature by g as m. u etc. . discourse on ignorance it has its origin in covetousness janaka, etc acquired heaven in consequence of their having repressed covetousness . the moral laws laid n by m. ri. are many the highest among them all is self restraint it surpasses charity and sacrifice and study of the vedas . penance is the root of everything by penance prajaapati created the universe, etc and ri. acquired the vedas and acquired their sixfold divine attributes renunciation constitutes the highest penance . discourse on truth and its indications it is applauded by brahmans, ri and p. it is yoga, it is brahmaan, sacrifice, etc. it has been found to weigh heavier than, horse sacrifices . discourse on the thirteen vices that are powerful foes of all all these thirteen faults stained the sons of dhritaraashtra . the characteristics of malevolent persons . how brahmans should be provided for. at the end of every year one should perform the vaishvaanara sacrifice . the practice of an act laid n in an alternative is not destructive of virtue fearing death, . saa the brahmans, and m. ri. make use of the alternative instead of the principal rule in seasons of distress. the five kinds of falsehood that are not sinful. the three sins that cannot be expiated. acts that are never sinful . different kinds of expiation for different kinds of sin . questioned by nakula, bhishma related khadgotpattikathana . when bhishma became silent yudhi shthira returned home. yudhishthiras question to vidura and his own brothers about the three things . vidura assigned precedence to virtue. arjuna assigned precedence to wealth . nakula and sahadeva assigned the precedence to both wealth and virtue. bhimasena assigns precedence to desire . yudhishthira applauded withdrawal from the three things, recommending emancipation or extinction, and quoted brahmaan. all of them were filled with delight and applauded yudhishthira, who once more addressed bhishma . asked by yudhishthira with whom friendship is delightful, bhishma, having also stated with whom friendship should be avoided, related an old story that had occurred in the country of the mlecchas, that lies to the north, about an ungrateful person, i.e. kritaghnopaakhyaana . bhishmas observations on ingratitude .
aapagaa, a river .
aapagaa, a river in the country of the madras .
apaam garbha, v. agni.
apaam hrada, a tirtha .
apaam prapatana, a tirtha .
apaana1 . e, apaana, having recourse to the heat that is in the urethra and the abinal intestines, moves, engaged in carrying out urine and fรฆces .
apaantaratama, son of sarasvati .
aparaajita1, a serpent .
aparaajita2, a king, incarnation of the second of the kaaleyas .
aparaajita3, a son of dhritaraashtras .
aparanandaa, a river .
aparaanta, a people in bhaaratavarsha .
aparaseka, pl a people conquered by sahadeva on his digvijaya .
aparimita, aparinirmita, aparinindita mahaa purushastave.
aapastamba, a brahman .
aapavopaakhyaana . gangaa fully related to shaantanu the reason why the brahmarshi vasishtha, the son of varuna, had cursed the vasus. when the vasus, prithu, etc were wandering with their wives in the wood near vasishthas hermitage, frequented by the devarshis, dyaus was prevailed upon by his wife, in the interest of her friend jitavati, daughter of ushinara, to steal vasishthas homadhenu, by drinking whose milk one could remain in unchanged youth for, years. vasishtha, however, was prevailed upon to let among them dyaus alone dwell on earth for a long time without marrying. then gangaa, taking with her the child, went away, and shaantanu returned to his capital shall now recount the virtues of the bhaarata shaantanu, whose splendid story is called the mahaabhaarata .
aapoda, v. aayoda.
apsaras1, mostly pl. . f, . c, i, u, ee, gg, . c, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . c, b, . d, . b, . j, . b, . g, . b, . e, .
apsaras2, special apsarases, etc. f, . aa, . c, .
apsuhomya, a rishi .
apsujaataa, a maatri. u, .
aapta, a serpent .
. asked by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related what the paandavas did after having rescued krishnaa . the paandavas left kaamyaka and returned to dvaitavana with krishnaa. once a deer carried off a brahmans arani and mantha, was pursued by the paandavas, and suddenly became invisible. bhima repented that he had not slain the praatikaamin, arjuna that he had not slain karna, and sahadeva that he had not slain shakuni. nakula, sahadeva, arjuna, and bhima were suc cessively sent to fetch water, but caused to drop n dead by a yaksha. at last yudhishthira himself went, answered thirty four questions put by the yaksha, chose that nakula should be revived, rescued all his brothers, learnt that the yaksha was his father dharma, was granted the boon that the brahman would recover his arani and mantha, that the paandavas would manage to live the thirteenth year un recognized in viraatas king, and that yudhishthira should overcome covetousness, etc. the paandavas asked permission of the brahmans to live the thirteenth year in concealment from the dhaartaraashtras, duryodhana, etc and karna and saubala. dhaumya, etc consoled yudhishthira even the gods have wandered in disguise for the purpose of overcoming foes. the brahmans went back to their homes, and the paandavas and dhaumya set out with krishnaa, and the next day proceeded for a krosha, and then sat n in order to take counsel of each other.
araani, a son of vishvaamitra .
arantuka, a dvaarapaala . kk, . the reading of b .
aaranyashaastra, plur. .
aaranyaka1, the aaranyaka or aaranyakas, considered as appendices to the vedas and as containing the rules for the forest mode of life often called shaastra . c, . b, .
aaranyakaparvan . the paandavas set out from haastinapura through the vardhamaana gate with their weapons, accompanied by krishnaa, in a northerly direction. indrasena and other servants, in number, with their wives, followed them on swift cars. the citizens wished to leave the town and follow them, but were prevailed upon by yudhishthira to return and cherish bhishma, dhritaraashtra, vidura, kunti, etc. about the close of the day the paandavas reached the banian pramaana on the banks of the gangaa, purified them selves by touching the water, and passed the night there, taking water alone as their sole sustenance, in the company of brahmans with and without fire, who had followed them . when the day broke in, yudhishthira tried to prevail upon the brahmans to leave him, in order that they might not undergo sufferings, living on fruits, roots, and deer. but they declared that they would follow him, themselves providing their own food. then a learned brahman, shaunaka, versed in saankhya and yoga, quoting the shlokas of janaka, told yudhishthira not only to retire from the world, but also in his heart not to mind the loss of his wealth. yudhishthira declared that it was not from avarice, but only because he could no more support the brahmans, that he regretted his wealth nobody should cook his food for himself alone, and nobody should slay an animal without devoting it to the gods, the pitris, and guests, nor should one eat of that food which had not been duly dedicated to the gods and the pitris. shaunaka said that sacrifices, study, gifts, and penance pave the way to the world of the pitris truth, forgiveness, subduing the senses, and renunciation of desire to the heaven of the gods, and they should be practised without reference to self . it was by their wealth of yoga that the rudras, saadhyas, aadityas, vasus, and ashvins rule over the creatures. so yudhishthira, who had already achieved success as to his indebtedness towards his ancestors and as to sacrifices, now ought to seek success in yoga and in ascetic austerities then he would be able to realize all his wishes . yudhishthira then, having consulted dhaumya, was taught by him names of surya, proclaimed by svayambhu . yudhishthira, touching the water of gangaa, with his senses under control, and feeding upon air alone, stood engaged in praanaayaama, and began a hymn in praise of surya . the sun then showed himself to yudhishthira and gave him a copper vessel, saying that if paancaali kept this vessel fruits, roots, meat, and vegetables, cooked in their kitchen, would be inexhaustible for twelve years. then the god vanished. rising from the water, yudhishthira took hold of dhaumyas feet and embraced his brothers. the clean food that was dressed, however little, became inexhaustible, and only after the brahmans, the brothers, yudhishthira, and at last krishnaa had eaten the days food became exhausted. having then performed sacrifices, they set out for the kaamyaka wood, accompanied by dhaumya and the brahmans . dhritaraashtra asked vidura what they should to secure the good will of the citizens. vidura said that he must give back to the paandavas all that had been theirs, let duryodhana, shakuni, and karna wait upon them, and dushaasana ask their forgiveness in open court, and if duryodhana would not consent to reign in peace jointly with yudhishthira, he ought to aban him and let yudhishthira reign alone. dhritaraashtra did not approve, and saying stay or go, as thou listest, he suddenly rose and went away, and vidura went away to the paandavas . starting from the gangaa, the paandavas went to kurukshetra, performed ablutions in the sarasvati, drishadvati, and yamunaa, and, travelling in a westerly direction, they arrived at the kaamyaka wood on the sarasvati. there vidura came to them in a single car. when seeing him, yudhishthira was afraid that he brought an invitation to a new match at dice with shakuni about their weapons. vidura told them that he had been forsaken by dhritaraashtra, and gave them advice how to secure adherents . after vidura had gone dhritaraashtra repented and fell n senseless, and having regained consciousness caused sanjaya to bring vidura back . duryodhana, being afraid because vidura had returned, held counsel with shakuni, karna, and dushaasana, who were of opinion that the paandavas would remain the promised space of time in the wood. as duryodhana, however, was not contented, karna proposed to set out and slay them. when they had gone out krishna dvaipaayana came upon them and commanded them to desist, and then appeared before dhritaraashtra . vyaasa warned dhritaraashtra against permitting duryodhana to try to slay the paandavas . as dhritaraashtra said he was unable to cast off his senseless son, vyaasa told him one when indra saw surabhi weeping in heaven, and asked her why she wept, she told him that one of her offspring was exceedingly harassed by a husbandman and although she had, offspring, and her affections flowed equally towards all, yet she felt greater compassion for the weak. indra poured n a shower of rain and caused obstruction to the husbandmans work. so feel anxious regarding the paandavas in distress let thy affections be greater towards the weak, and let duryodhana make peace with them . maitreya shaapa .
aaratta, a people . b, .
arbuda1, a serpent .
arbuda2, a tirtha .
aarcikaparvata, a holy place. b, the place of the maruts, with the caityas of the gods, the tirtha of the moon, inhabited by vaikhaanasas, vaalikhilyas, paavakas, living upon air where shaantanu and shunaka, nara and naaraayana have attained eternity where gods, pitris, and great rishis have practised austerities.
arcismanta, one of the three classes of pitris .
arcismati, a daughter of angiras .
aarshyashringi, v. aarshyashringi.
ardhacandravyuha, a certain array see vyuha.
ardhakila, a tirtha .
ardhamaasa2, pl the half months, person. u, .
aardraa, a nakshatra .
. on the abhishecaniya day maharshis and naaraada entered the antarvedi and sat n together with the raajarshis engaged in various topics of conversation and dispute. no shudra was then near the antarvedi, nor anybody without vows . naarada sat there with feelings of awe, remembering the words he had heard of old in the mansion of brahmaan regarding the incarnation of the deities, and knowing that krishna was the incarnation of naaraayana and would himself destroy all these assembled kshattriyas. bhishma then proposed to yudhishthira that arghas should be offered to the kings, and first to him who was the foremost. as bhishma declared krishna to be foremost, he caused sahadeva to present the first argha to krishna, which filled the cedi king shishupaala with envy . shishupaala gravely censures bhishma, yudhishthira, and krishna, and accompanied by the kings left the assembly . yudhishthira ran after shishupaala and spoke sweetly to him in order to conciliate him bhishma maintained the fitness of giving krishna the first argha . saahadeva and naarada declared it to be highly improper not to worship krishna. sunitha stirred the kings up in order to obstruct the completion of the sacrifice .
arha2, a people .
ariha1, son of avaacina .
ariha2, son of devaatithi .
ariha3, seems to be a son of dhrtaraashtras .
arimejaya, a vrishni .
arishtanemi1, a rishi, sometimes identified with taarkshya and sometimes named together with him .
arjuna1 kaartavirya, haihaya king the haihaya king arjuna had, arms, and, by the favour of dattaatreya, he had obtained a golden vimaana that could proceed everywhere without obstruction, and ruled over all beings . the gods and rishis asked vishnu to kill him. on his celestial vimaana. arjuna affronted indra, when he was sporting with shashi. after having held a consultation with indra, vishnu went to his hermitage badari, once, when the sons of jamadagni had gone out, arjuna kaartavirya, the lord of the country near the sea shore, came to the hermitage, and, being received hospitably by renukaa, carried off the calf of the homadhenu and pulled n the trees. as jamadagni told raama this, raama rushed towards arjuna, and cut n his, arms with his arrows, and killed him. the heirs of arjuna came while raama was away, and shot jamadagni to death with their arrows. when they had gone away raama returned to the hermitage, after having lamented for and cremated his father, raama vowed the slaughter of the entire kshattriya caste, killed kaartaviryas sons, etc. b, meanwhile the virtuous kshattriya, the haihaya king arjuna kaartavirya, with, arms through the grace of dattaatreya, having subjugated the whole earth with its mountains and seven islands, became a powerful emperor, and gave away the earth to the brahmans in a horse sacrifice. solicited by agni, he once gave alms to that deity, who sprung from the point of his shaft, i.e. agni burnt villages, etc and he burnt also the retreat of aapava, who cursed arjuna, saying that raama should lop off his arms. always devoted to peace, always regardful of brahmans, etc arjuna did not mind that curse. his sons, always haughty and cruel, seized and brought away the calf of jamadagnis homa cow, without the knowledge of arjuna. raama lopped off the arms of arjuna and brought back the calf the sons of arjuna came and slew jamadagni in the absence of raama, who vowed to free the earth of kshattriyas, and slaughtered all the sons and grandsons of arjuna, and, haihayas, and freed the earth of all kshattriyas, etc . b, ff the haihaya king arjuna kaartavirya with, arms became the lord of this whole world, residing in maahishmati he gave large gifts to dattaatreya, who granted him four boons that he should have, arms in battle, but only two at home that he should subjugate the whole earth righteously and reign with vigilance and that whenever he might happen to go wrong, the righteous should set him right. a. now regarded himself as having no equal. an invisible voice said that the brahman is superior to the kshattriya a. maintained that the brahmans take refuge with the kshattriyas shall bring the skin clad brahmans under my sway. vaayu warned a addressing him from the air, etc. at last arjuna praised the brahmans, mentioning dattaatreya. vaayu told him always to protect them a terrible danger threatens thee from the bhrigus that will take place after a time, . c, the, armed king kaartaviryaarjuna conquered the whole earth with his bow once he showered hundreds of arrows at the ocean. the ocean asked him to desist, as he injured the creatures in the waters arjuna asked if there existed any bowman who was his equal in shooting. the ocean named raama jaamadagnya. arjuna came and began to trouble him raama burnt his troops and prostrated him with his battle axe and drove away his kinsmen to the mountain fastnesses their progeny became vrishalas owing to their inability to find brahmans so the dravidas, etc. parashu raama . also anupapati, haihaya, haihayendra, haihayaadhipati, haihayarshabha, haihayashreshtha, kaartavirya.
arjuna3, a rishi in the palace of yama .
arjunaabhigamanaparvan. hearing that the paandavas had been banished, the bhojas, vrishnis, andhakas, the heirs of pancaala, the cedi king dhrishtaketu, the brothers kaikeya went to see them. as krishna said the earth shall drink the blood of duryodhana, etc arjuna tried to pacify him by reciting the feats achieved in his former lives then arjuna, the soul of krishna, became silent, and janaardana replied that he was identical with arjuna. then paancaali, surrounded by dhrishtadyumna and her other brothers, praised krishna . she then blamed him and the paandavas for having let her endure the shame of being dragged in the assembly, etc and relates the persecutions of duryodhana and the valour of bhima until the svayamvara. krishna promised that she should be avenged, and dhrishtadyumna said will slay drona shikhandin pitaamaha bhimasena duryodhana and dhananjaya karna assisted by raama and krishna we are invincible in battle even to indra . krishna said that if he had not been absent from dvaarakaa at that time, he should have come and prevented the gambling by either persuading dhritaraashtra, or compelling him by force on arriving at dvaarakaa he had learnt from yuyudhaana what had happened and had instantly come to see them . saubhavadhop. . dvaita vanapravesha . draupadi paritaapa vaakya . kaamyakavana pravesha . indradarshana . for continuation v. kairaataparvan.
arjunaka, a hunter .
arjunasya vanavaasa .
arjunasya vane vaasa .
arjunavanavaasaparvan . the paandavas continued to reside there, and by their prowess they brought many kings under their sway, and on account of their virtue the whole race of the kurus grew in prosperity. after some time robbers lifted the cattle of a brahman, who then repaired to khaandava prastha and reproved the paandavas. arjuna heard it but the chamber where the paandavas had their weapons being then occupied by yudhishthira with krishnaa, arjuna was obliged to violate the established rule by entering the chamber. then, armed with the bow and attired in mail and riding on his war chariot decked with flagstaffs, he pursued the thieves and compelled them to give up the booty. then, notwith standing yudhishthiras objections, he went to the forest to live there for twelve years . arjuna set out followed by brahmans conversant with the vedas and vedaangas and devoted to the contemplation of the supreme spirit, by mendicants devoted to bhagavat, by reciters of the puraanas, and by reciters of sacred stories, etc and settled at gangaadvaara, where the brahmans performed innumerable agnihotras. one day when arjuna had performed his ablutions in the gangaa, and offered the oblations of water to his deceased ancestors, and when he was about to rise up from the stream desirous of performing his sacrificial rites before the fire, he was drawn away to the bottom of the water by ulupi, the daughter of the naaga king kauravya of the lineage of airaavata, urged by the god of desire. there he saw a sacrificial fire, where he performed his sacrificial rites, by which agni was much gratified. ulupi persuaded him that it was a greater merit to give himself up to her than to keep the vow of a brahmacaarin, and having spent the night there, he in the morning, accompanied by ulupi, came back to gangaadvaara. ulupi, taking leave of him there, said that he would be invincible in water . then he set out towards the himavat and came to agastyavata and the mountain of vasishtha in bhrigutunga he bestowed many thousands of kine, etc on brahmans and visited many tirthas . at the gate of the king of kalinga the brahmans desisted from following him further he crossed kalinga, beheld the mahendra mountain aned with the ascetics, and went to manipura, proceeding slowly along the seashore. there he married citraangadaa, the daughter of king citravaahana, and dwelt there for three years. when citraangadaa had given birth to a son, arjuna set out on his wanderings again . then arjuna went to the tirthas at the southern ocean. there five tirthas were shunned on account of five crocodiles that seized the devotees agastyatirtha, saubhadra, pauloma, kaarandhama, and bhaaradvaajas tirtha. arjuna plunged into the saubhadra, and was seized by a crocodile, which he dragged to the shore. it then became the apsaras vargaa, the friend of dhanapati . when she with her four companions, going to the abode of kubera, had in vain tempted an ascetic brahman, that brahman had cursed them, saying that they should become crocodiles for years . vargaa said as we asked the rishi to grant us par, he said and, are all indicative of eternity but the words as employed by me is to be understood as a limited period you will be delivered by an exalted individual, and those waters shall become sacred and purifying under the name of naaritirthaani. the devarshi naarada directed us to these lakes, and said that dhananjaya would soon deliver us. arjuna then also delivered the other four apsarases. then he pro ceeded to manipura to see citraangadaa with her he had begotten king babhruvaahana. then he proceeded towards gokarna . then arjuna visited the tirthas on the shores of the western ocean, and arrived at prabhaasa. there madhusudana visited him, and he and arjuna, who were the rishis nara and naaraayana, sported there for some time. then they went to the raivataka mountain, after krishna had caused this mountain to be well aned by many artifices there he saw the performances of the actors and the dancers. the next morning they set out for dvaarakaa, welcomed by the bhojas, vrishnis, and andhakas. there he dwelt in the mansion of krishna for many days .
arjunaavara but b. has arjunaad vara .
arka3, an ancient king .
aarsha, adj .
aarshtishena1, a rishi . . in the krita age aa though residing for a long time in his preceptors house, and attending to his lessons every could not master any branch of knowledge or the vedas. by austere penances he then acquired the mastery of the vedas and great learning and became perfect in that tirtha, and bestowed three boons on it from this day a person who bathes in this tirtha, shall obtain the benefit of a horse sacrifice from this day no fear from snakes and wild beasts will be in this tirtha small exertions in this place will lead to great results. then the muni proceeded to heaven .
aarshtishena2, a rishi in the palace of yama .
aarshyashringi, . ga.
aartimat . asita1.
aruna1 son of kashyapa and vinataa came out of the egg, though not yet full grown, and cursed his mother carried by garuda and placed in the east at this time surya, who was in danger of being devoured by raahu, and did not obtain any help, became wroth, and from the mountains of the west began to destroy the world with heat. the gods and rishis repaired to brahmaan, who ordered aruna to become the charioteer of the sun and take away the suns glow begotten in consequence of the vaalikhilyas having cursed indra, and destined by kashyapa to become the brother and helpmate of indra . b, . u, .
aruna4, pl .
arunaa, a river . p, . t, formerly the presence of that river at its site was concealed. sarasvati repaired to the arunaa and flooded it with her waters. this confluence of sarasvati and arunaa is highly sacred. brahmaan caused indra to bathe in the arunaa .
arundhati, the wife of vasishtha b, a. became jealous of vasishtha, one of the seven rishis, etc. in consequence of this her presumption she has become a little star, like fire mixed with smoke, sometimes visible and sometimes invisible apadhyaanena saa tena dhumaarunasamaprabhaalakshyaa lakshyaa naabhirupaa nimittam iva pashyati . z, indra related to shrutaavati in this very tirtha the seven ri. had, on one occasion, left arundhati while they went to himavat in order to gather fruits and roots. a drought occurred extending for twelve years the ri having made an asylum for themselves, continued to live there in a forest of himavat. seeing arundhati devoted to penances, shiva in the form of a brahman came to her and asked for alms, and, as her store of food was exhausted, he told her to cook jujubes. while she listened to his discourses and cooked, without food, that twelve years drought passed away to her as if it were a single day. then the seven ri. returned mahaadeva, in his own form, said that the ascetic merit of arundhati was much greater than theirs, and granted her the boon that this spot should become an excellent tirtha named badarapaacana, resorted to by si. and . ri and that he who observes a fast there and resides there for three nights after having cleansed himself should obtain the benefit of a twelve years fast. then he repaired to heaven. ri. wondered at the sight of the god and because arundhati was unfatigued and still possessed the hue of health, a. once explained to ri p and . the mysteries of dharma brahmaan granted her that her penances would continually increase.
arundhativata, a tirtha .
aaruni1 paancaalya, disciple of the rishi aayoda dhaumya a. stopped a break in the dike of a field by laying himself n there, thence he was called uddaalaka.
aaruni2 present at the birth of arjuna.
aaruni3, a serpent .
arvaavasu deceived by his brother paraavasu, he composed the rahasyaveda of the sun, etc .
arvuka, a people .
aaryaka, a serpent .
aryaman1, one of the aadityas . u, .
aryaavartta, a country in bharatavarsha, hindustan .
asamanjas1, at the request of yudhishthira, lomasha related asa manjas, the son of sagara and shaibyaa, used to seize the children of the citizens by the throat and throw them into the river. at the request of the citizens, sagara caused his ministers to drive asamanjas immediately from the city .
asanga, a name of chastisement .
asanjna, v. mahaapurushastava.
aashaadha3, adj. .
aashaadha4, pl a nakshatra .
ashtaka yayaati, who was the maternal grandfather of a discoursed with him on haughtiness, etc and told him his own history yayaati spoke to a. of those who talk about their own merit, etc continuation yayaati said that he should now fall into the bhauma hell the kings, a etc offered him their lokas, and would themselves go to hell yayaati did not accept the offer then appeared five golden cars, in which they all five ascended to heaven yayaati told them that he was their maternal grandfather, etc .
ashtaavakra1, a rishi cursed by kahoda shvetaketu informed him who his father was they both go to the sacrifice of janaka ashtaavakra dik s.ashtaavakrasya samvaadam dishayaa sahaviprashe
ashtaavakra2, a tirtha r, bhishma mentioned the profit of bathing in a etc.
. b, ff. bhishma said in days of yore ashtaavakra asked ri. vadaanya for his beautiful daughter suprabhaa. vadaanya first caused him to make a journey to the north, indicating the road himavat the sacred river baahudaa, where he bathed in one of the tirthas, etc and worshipped rudra and umaa kailaasa, where he saw a golden gate, etc and was honoured by kubera among y g and k and where aps. danced there he remained a celestial year having crossed kailaasa and mandara as also the golden mountains, he came to the region where mahaadeva resides attired as an ascetic, paarshadas of which are frolicsome and fond of dance and possessed of faces of diverse forms, which was peopled by si caa and pc where umaa had practised austerities for the sake of shiva where, in days of yore, on the mahaapaarshva the seasons, etc in their material forms had aed mahaadeva a beautiful forest, where the river mandaakini was seen, with an old and decrepit female ascetic, who in vain tempted him with love, at last appearing in a beautiful form . she turned out to be the goddess of the north, who, having been gratified by ri. vadaanya, had devised this trial and now instructed him, showing him the levity of women, even when aged thou hast subjugated all the worlds by thy strength of mind thy journey back will not be irksome thou wilt obtain the wife thou hast chosen she will bear thee a son. ashtaavakra came back to his own abode, and then to vadaanya, who wedded him to the girl. there he continued to dwell joyously in his own hermitage .
ashtaavakriya a. atraiva vivaayatra bandinaa, etc ff. uddaalaka gave his own daughter sujaataa in marriage, together with sacred learning, to his disciple the brahman kahoda, who had served him long. the embryo in her womb had become versed in the shaastras and the vedas with the angas, and blamed kahoda, who had been reading the whole night. the great rishi kahoda cursed him to become crooked on eight parts of his body, wherefore he, when born, was called ashtaavakra. in order to procure wealth for sujaataa, kahoda went to king janaka, where he was defeated in a controversy with the suta bandin and was immersed into water. uddaalaka prevailed upon sujaataa to keep it a secret from ashtaavakra, who regarded uddaalaka as his father and shvetaketu, the son of uddaalaka, who was of the same age with himself, as his brother, until in his year shvetaketu in anger happened to disclose the matter to him. he and shvetaketu then went to the sacrifice of janaka, and on being driven from the entrance ashtaavakra met the king, and in the course of a conversation with him and the rkeeper he compared janaka to yayaati, and said that he had heard that bandin caused those whom he had vanquished in disputation to be drowned in the sea by men sent by janaka, and he declared that he had come to maintain the unity with braahman and to defeat bandin then he answered several enigmatical questions and was admitted . here they disputed in such a way that bandin enumerated things of which there is only, ashtaavakra groups of, ba of, a of, ba of, a of, ba of, a of, ba of, a of, ba of, a of . as bandin had said the first half shloka with, he stopped, and ashtaavakra fulfilled the shloka. bandin was then deemed to be vanquished, and at the request of ashtaavakra he merged into the sea, after he had declared himself to be the son of varuna and that he had caused the brahmans to be drowned in order that they might see the twelve years sattra of varuna that was performed simultaneously with that of janaka. they at once reappeared, and kahoda let ashtaavakra bathe in the river samangaa, and all his limbs were immediately made straight, and the samangaa became a remover of sin. there fore you also should bathe there .
asi . d, dharmagarbhena, its forms are the different sorts of punishment ib. e, its eight mysterious names, asi, etc. foll etc.
asita1 or asita devala or devala, a rishi . b, a.. has said that gambling is sinful, as is all deceitfulness in aadityatirtha ri. a.. lived in days of yore, observant of the duties of a householder he always practised the vow of brahmacarya. once the ascetic mendicant . jaigishavya, devoted to yoga, came to devalas hermitage and attained to success . devala always kept his eyes on him. after a long time, devala on one occasion lost sight of jaigishavya at the hour of dinner, however, he approached devala in order to solicit alms, and . worshipped him, after the rites laid n by ri for many years but jaigishavya never spoke a single word to him. . proceeded to the shore of the ocean, journeying through the welkin and bearing his earthen jug with him there he saw jaigishavya who had arrived there before him, at which m. ri. a. wondered much. having finished his ablutions and silent prayers, . returned to his hermitage, bearing with him his earthen vessel filled with water. entering his own hermitage, he saw jaigishavya seated there. . then soared aloft into the sky in order to ascertain who jaigishavya really was. he saw crowds of sky ranging si. rapt in meditation, and he saw jaigishavya, reverentially worshipped by them, and he became filled with wonder at the sight. he saw jaigishavya set out for the pitriloka yaamyaloka, etc. . at last he was seen to pass into the regions of the brahmasattvins, then through three other regions to those of chaste women and such as are devoted to their husbands. at this point a. lost sight of him, and enquiring of the foremost of si. in the regions of the brahmasattvins, he was told that jaigishavya had gone to the eternal region of brahman. a. endeavoured to soar aloft but he soon fell n, and the si. declared that he was not worthy to proceed thither. . came n, descending from one region to another in due order, to his hermitage, where he again beheld jaigishavya, who taught him the religion of emancipation and the ordinances of yoga, etc and performed all the acts according to the rites for that end. then all creatures with p. began to weep, saying, who will henceforth give us food . then thought of renouncing the religion of moksha then all kinds of fruits and roots, etc began to weep, saying, the wicked hearted . will once more pluck and eat us, having once assured all creatures of his perfect harmlessness. then . abaned the religion of a householder and ated that of moksha, and obtained the highest success and the highest yoga. . with brih. applauded jaigishavya only naarada contradicted e, .
asita2, a king conquered by maandhaatri . b, .
asita4, a mountain .
asta, the place in the west where the sun sets, a, b, .
aastika some read the mahaabhaarata beginning with aa the deliverance of the serpents by the brahman aa. mighty in spiritual energy and having mastered the vedas and the vedaangas aastikaparvan . aasya kave saadho destined by brahmaan to rescue the harmless among the serpents aa. was born and reared in vaasukis house etymology of his name . how he appeared at the snake sacrifice and rescued the remaining serpents, . the reason why takshaka had not fallen into the fire was that aa. had said thrice, stay. janamejaya let the sacrifice come to an end he bestowed wealth upon lohitaaksha, etc. a. returned home after having promised that he would become a sadasya at janamejayas horse sacrifice he obtained the boon from the snakes that those, who in the morning or the evening cheerfully read the sacred account of his act, should have no fear from them nor should those who recall asita, aartimat, and sunitha to their minds nor those who would say, recall the famous aastika, etc to my mind. aa. at last died, leaving sons and grandsons behind him aastikasya kaver caritam . b, .
aastika aakhyaana, .
the of the minor parvans sauti related how the ascetic jaratkaaru, upon a woman, likewise named jaratkaaru, being the sister of the serpent king vaasuki, begot a son destined to neutralize the curse inflicted on the serpents by their mother origin of the serpents and of garuda and aruna in order to explain the origin of uccaishravas, sauti related the churning of the ocean and the consequent production of the amrita, etc kadru and vinataa made a bet as to the colour of the tail of uccaishravas, and vinataa became the slave of kadru kadru cursed the serpents, her sons, to be burnt at the snake sacrifice of janamejaya exploits of garuda aruna became the charioteer of the sun garuda set out to bring the amrita to the snakes, who had promised that he and his mother should on this condition be freed from bondage vibhaavasu and supratika, and garudas meeting with the vaalikhilyas omens foreboding fear appeared among the gods, owing to indras having formerly been cursed by the vaalikhilyas garuda snatched the amrita, made friendship with vishnu and indra, and placed the amrita before the snakes, who declared vinataa to be free but indra took it from them enumeration of the principal snakes. shesha . consultation of the serpents under vaasuki it became known that aastika would be born and save the harmless serpents. etymology of jaratkaaru. king parikshit, the son of abhimanyu, was cursed and consequently struck to death by takshaka kaashyapa was bribed to return without curing him. janamejaya succeeded his father parikshit. the story of jaratkaaru repeated and some what enlarged. jaratkaaru left his wife. aastika was born, and reared by vaasuki. the ministers of janamejaya told him about parikshit the ministers of janamejaya learned what had happened between takshaka and kaashyapa. jana mejaya resolved to avenge his father and utanka. janamejaya made preparations for a snake sacrifice. b janamejayas snake sacrifice enumeration of the principal snakes that fell into the fire, of vaasukis, takshakas, airaavatas, kauravyas . and dhrta raashtras race . sauti said this story have told, as pramati narrated it to ruru, after having heard what was said by the dundubha.
astradarshana when the princes had become accomplished in arms drona addressed dhritaraashtra in the presence of kripa, somadatta, baahlika, bhishma, vyaasa, and vidura, asking him to let them show their proficiency. vidura then let drona measure out a place, and kunti, gaandhaari, etc and the citizens came out to behold the princes skill. drona and ashvatthaaman appeared like the moon accompanied by the planet mars . the spectators, seeing the prowess of the princes, fancied they were beholding the city of the gandharvas. vidura described all the feats of the princes to dhritaraashtra, and kunti to gaandhaari . a combat with maces between duryodhana and bhima divided the spectators into two parties, until drona caused ashvatthaaman to separate them. the exploits of arjuna were quite wonderful. drona stood surrounded by the five paarthas like the moon in conjunction with the five starred saavitra, and duryodhana, mace in hand, surrounded by his brothers and ashvatthaaman, was like purandara encircled by the hosts of gods on the occasion of the victory over the daanavas . karna enters and challenges arjuna. the dhaartaraashtras stood by karna, while drona, kripa, and bhishma remained with arjuna. kunti swooned away, and was restored to consciousness by vidura, who caused sandal paste and water to be sprinkled on her person. kripa rejects karna but duryodhana then installed karna as king of anga . the sun went n duryodhana led karna out of the arena, and the paandavas, accompanied by drona, kripa, and bhishma, returned to their abodes .
asura1, pl the enemies of the gods, participated with the gods in the churning of the ocean, would possess themselves of the ambrosia, but were vanquished . . . b, . j, . u, . gg, . b, . b, b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . b
asura2, sg . b, . names of single asuras ashva, . bali, . balina, . baana, . bhagadatta, . candrahantri, . sharabha, . shatamukha, . shatha, . damsha, . dhundhu, . ekacakra, . gavishtha, . hiranyakashipu, . hiranyaaksha, . ilvala, . jambha, . jaraasandha, . kaitabha, . kaaleyaa, . keshin, . krathana, . krodhahantri, . kupatha, . mada, . madhu, . maya, . mayura, . mritapaa, . namuci, . naraka, . nicandra, . pitha, . prahlaada, . sunda, . surya, . svarbhaanu, . taaraka, . upasunda, . sunda. vaataapi, . vishvarupa, . vikshara, . vinaashana candrasya, . virupaaksha, . vrishaparvan, . vritra, .
asuraa, one of the daughters of praadhaa .
aasura, adj .
aasuraayani, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
aasuri. b, .
ataka, a naaga .
atavishikhara, pl .
atavika, pl. .
atharvashiras1, an upanishad, . do. = mahaapurusha .
atharvan3, pl. = atharvaveda, .
atharvaangirasa, a kind of rishis .
athida, v. alinda.
atibala1, u, .
atibala2. b, obtaining an extensive empire after the demise of his father, he became a slave of his passions.
atishringa. u, .
atisaara, v. abhisaara.
atishthira. u, .
atithi. b, .
ativarcas. u, .
atiyama. u, .
aatman1, = shiva, krishna .
aatreya2, pl. .
atri1, a rishi. b, his discourse with gautama as to who is to be styled the foremost of sovereigns he gets large gifts from king vainya, . e, . u, . b, . c, . b, the wife of atri abaned her husband and sought the protection of mahaa deva, who granted her that she should obtain a son without atri, . b, . j, . m vaayu said once the gods and daa. were fighting each other in the dark. raahu pierced both surya and soma with his arrows. the gods repaired to the brahman ri. atri, who becoming the moon and sun dispelled the darkness and burnt the as who were now slain by the gods. name thou a kshattriya superior to atri, .
atyugra, = shiva.
aushija . aushija.
aushinara1 . b, .
aushinara2, adj. .
auddaalaki a rishiaanushaasan.shvetaketu among the rishis of the north
aurva son of cyavana and aarushi and father of ricika, . g, . g, . bhaargava, bhrigunandana.
aurva aakhyaana i.e. aurvopaakhyaana.
aurvopaakhyaana . king kritavirya, the yaajya of the bhrigus, at the end of the soma sacrifice gratified the brahmans with large offerings. after he had ascended to heaven, it came to happen that his descendants were in want of wealth. knowing that the bhrigus were rich, they went to them and begged. some amongst the bhrigus buried their wealth under the earth, some gave it away to brahmans, and some duly gave it to the kshattriyas. some kshattriyas, while digging at the house of a bhaargava, came upon a large treasure. the kshattriyas then began to kill the bhrigus with their arrows all over the earth, even the embryos. a bhrigu woman fled to himavat, holding an embryo in one of her thighs . from fear a brahman woman reported this to the kshattriyas. the kshattriyas then went to destroy that embryo, which, how ever, came out, tearing open the thigh and dazzling the eyes of the kshattriyas so that they lost their sight. they asked the woman that they might be restored to sight, promising to abstain from their sinful practice . she told them to ask the child, which they did, and regaining their eye sights they went away. the child was named aurva, because he had been born after tearing open his mothers thigh . aurva devoted himself to the austerest of penances with the object of destroying the whole world to gratify his ancestors. the pitris then all came from pitriloka, and said be propitious towards the three worlds. having grown weary with the long periods of life allotted to us, we desired our own destruction through the kshattriyas. such as commit suicide never attain to regions that are blessed, therefore we abstained from self destruction . when aurva replied that his vow must not be in vain, the pitris prevailed upon him to throw his wrath into the waters of the ocean, the whole universe being made of water. it became a large horse head, which, emitting fire from its mouth, consumes the waters of the ocean . hearing this the viprarshi paraashara controlled his wrath from destroying the worlds. but he performed a great raakshasa sacrifice and began to burn the raakshasas in it, and vasishtha did not restrain him. desirous of ending that sacrifice the rishi atri came to that place, and also pulastya and pulaha and kratu, desiring to save the raakshasas. seeing that many raakshasas had already been slain, pulastya said that which befell thy father was brought about by his own curse no raakshasa was capable of devouring shakti he himself provided for his own death vishvaamitra was only a blind instrument in that matter. both shakti and kalmaashapaada have ascended to heaven, and are enjoying great happiness, as also the other sons of vasishtha. aban this sacrifice of thine. paraashara then brought his sacrifice to an end, and threw the fire into the woods on the north of the himavat, where it may be seen to this day consuming raakshasas and trees and stones in all seasons .
aavaha q, the second wind called aa. blows with a great noise it is this wind that causes soma and the other luminaries to rise and appear. within the body that wind is called udaana by the wise.
avanti, pl. .
aavantya . dyutap.aaa tv abhishekaartham aapo . apo bahuvidhaas tathaayaanasandhip.aavantyo, tha jayadrathaaavantya kaalinga jayadratheshubhagavadgitaap.aavantyo, tha jayadratha, vindaanuvindau...bhishmavadhap.jayadrathav.shalyap.ao, tha jayadrathastrivil.slain by bhima
avikalpana . b, a king
avikshit2. e, king a. kaarandhama, son of suvarcas, lived at the beginning of the tretaa age, and was equal to indra, brihaspati, and himavat all kings were under his control he was given to sacrifices, he performed hundreds of horse sacriflces, and angiras himself served as his priest, .
avimudhaa, a kind of rishis .
avrihaka a, .
avyaya1, . do a serpent, .
aayoda dhaumya, a rishi. about the time of king janamejaya, son of parikshit, there was a rishi named aa. dh. with three disciples upamanyu, aaruni paancalya, and veda aayodhaumya. aayoda dhaumya.
ayoga, a caste, .
aayu . e, sha putro nahushaaanushaasan.aayunaathaanaranyenakrishnason of pururavas and father of nahushaaanushaasan.
ayutanaayin . .
baabhravaayani. b, .
babhru2, pl. .
babhru3 . b, .
babhruvaahana . babhruvaaha, citraangadaasuta, citraangadaat maja, dhananjayasuta, manipurapati, manipureshvara.
badarapaacana . y, there the beautiful shrutaavati, bharadvaajas daughter, a brahma caarini, practised austerities for many years, desirous of obtaining indra for her husband. indra then came in the guise of b. ri. vasishtha, and told her that everything is attainable by penances, and asked her to boil five jujubes, when he went away to mentally recite certain mantras at indratirtha, that was not far away. she sat n to boil the jujubes, but in vain the day was about to wane her fuel was all consumed then she first thrust her feet into the fire, without changing a muscle of her face. indra then showed himself in his own proper form, and said that her wish would be accomplished throwing off her body, she would live with him in heaven as his spouse and this tirtha would be the foremost in the world and be called b. he granted her a boon superior to that granted to arundhati by mahaadeva the person who will reside in this tirtha for only one night and bathe there with his soul fixed on meditation, will, after having thrown off his body, obtain many regions of blessedness difficult of acquisition. then indra went back to heaven a shower of celestial flowers poured n, etc and shrutaavati, throwing off her body, became the spouse of indra. badaripaacana.
badari . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, .
baahika, pl. .
baahika, a water among the baahikas, .
baahl, v. baalh.
baahu1 . do . do . b, .
baahushaalin1 . do. = shiva
baahudaa . b, . m, .
bahudaamaa . u, .
baahuka3, a prince .
bahulaa . u, .
bahuputrikaa . u, .
bahuvaadyaa, v. baahubaadhaa.
bahuyojanaa . u, .
baka1 ff, .
baka3 in former times the ri. residing in the naimisha forest had performed a sacrifice which extended over twelve years. after the vishvajit had been completed, the ri. went to the country of the paancaalas and solicited the king to give them twenty one calves to be given away as dakshinaa. daalbhya baka gave them his, and then applied to dhritaraashtra, who, as some of his kine had died, angrily told him to take these. b. set his heart upon the destruction of king dhritaraashtra. cutting the flesh off from the dead animals, having ignited a fire on the tirtha of the sarasvati, he poured those pieces as libations for the destruction of king dhritaraashtras king, which began to waste away, until he, reminded by his counsellors, repairing to the bank of the sarasvati, had gratified ri. b who, in order to free his king, again poured libations into the fire. receiving many animals as a gift, he once more proceeded to the naimisha wood, and dhritaraashtra returned to his capital.
baka5, pl a people .
baka bhraatri, . cf .
baka shakra samvaada yudhishthira, having heard that the rishis baka and daalbhya were long lived and friends of indra, asked maarkandeya about the meeting of baka and indra. maarkandeya related after the conflict between the gods and asuras was over, and indra had become the ruler of the three worlds, all people were happy and virtuous. once indra, riding on airaavata, surveyed his happy subjects, and, descending to earth, he made a visit to the rishi baka, who had lived for, years and was aed by gods and rishis, in his hermitage in the east by the seaside. indra asked him about the sorrows of those who have a long life. baka mentioned several common disagreeable things, and finally, the having to witness the injustices that take place. indra then asked him about their joys he mentioned the frugal life of a pious brahman, who only eats after having waited on his guest.
bakanakha . b, .
bakavadhaparvan ff. the paandavas for some time dwelt in the abode of the brahman, living on alms bhima alone used to eat one half of the alms. one day bhima and kunti overheard the brahman complaining, and his wife and daughter asked to be sacrificed for him to a raakshasa, and their little son said that he would slay the raakshasa with a blade of grass. kunti approached, and learned that the raakshasa baka, a cannibal, protected the town and the country, receiving as his fee a cartload of rice, two buffaloes, and the human being who brought them to him, from one after another of the householders, while the king, residing in vetrakiyagriha, did nothing to protect the country against him. now the turn had come for the brahman, and as he had no wealth to buy a man, and could not part with any of his family, he would go with all his family to the raakshasa, in order that he might devour them all . kunti said that one of her sons would bring the food to the raakshasa. this the brahman energetically refused, until she had told him that on account of his strength and mantras her son would be safe but he ought not to disclose this fact to anybody, for then people might trouble them out of curiosity, and if her son imparted his knowledge to anybody he would himself no longer be able to profit by it. bhima also consented . when the others returned home with their alms, yudhishthira blamed his mother for her rash act but she relied on bhima . the next morning bhima set out for the abode of the raakshasa, and approaching he began himself to eat the food he carried, loudly calling the raakshasa by his name. the raakshasa came out in a fury but bhima, disregarding his yells and blows, leisurely ate up the whole of that food and washed his hands. then they began to hurl trees at each other, and thereupon they clasped each other with their arms. at last bhima pressed baka n to the earth, and placing one knee on the middle of his back, bent him ble, while he roared frightfully and began to vomit blood . baka died uttering frightful yells. the raakshasas, his relatives, came and promised never again to kill human beings, and from that day the raakshasas of that region were very peaceful towards mankind. bhima placed the corpse at one of the gates of the town, and went away unobserved. the brahman told the citizens that it was a brahman skilled in mantras who had slain the raakshasa, and they established a brahma festival .
bala1 . b, .
bala4 . u, .
. vaishampaayana said baladeva first proceeded to prabhaasa, where uduraaj, who had been affected with phthisis, became freed from his curse, whence its name. asked by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related prabhaasotpattikathana . thence bala raama proceeded to camasodbheda, where he passed one night and gave away costly gifts. thence he proceeded to udapaana, and thence to vinashana, called so by the ri. because the sarasvati has there become invisible from contempt of shudras and aabhiras. thence to subhu mika, gandharvaanaam tirtha, gargasrotas thence to shankhatirtha thence to the dvaita lake then, along the southern bank of the sarasvati, to naagadhanvan . baladeva then set out with his face towards the east, and one after another reached hundreds and thousands of tirthas that occurred at every step. bathing in all those tirthas, and observing fasts, etc as directed by ri and giving away wealth in profusion, etc he set out for that spot where the sarasvati turns in an eastward direction in order to behold the ri. in the forest of naimisha, and he became filled with wonder. there, at kurukshetra, o foremost one of kurus race, thou perform great sacrifices and rites. thence bala raama went to the tirtha saptasaarasvata, resorted to by vaaneyas and other ascetics, where the great ascetic crowned with success performed his penances . requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related the history of saptasaarasvata and mankanaka . having passed one night there, bala raama went to aushanasa tirtha kapaalamocana the great muni mahodara, whose thigh had been seized by the head of a raa. slain by raama, was liberated. there kaavya had performed tapas, and the whole science of politics and morals was revealed to him, while meditating on the war of dai. and daa. requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related the story of mahodara . thence bala raama went to the abode of rushangu, where aarshtishena had formerly undergone austere penances, and where the great muni vishvaamitra had become a brahman. then to that tirtha where brahmaan had created the worlds where the great ri. aarshtishena had acquired brahman hood where the ri. ri. sindhudvipa, the great ascetic devaapi, and the muni vishvaa mitra had obtained brahmanhood . requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related the history of aarshtishena and of vishvaamitra . thence to the abode of baka, where daalbhya baka had practised austerities which resounded with the chanting of the vedas, where the ri. baka daalbhya poured the king of dhritaraashtra vaicitraviryi as a libation into the sacrificial fire. in that tirtha brihaspati also poured libations into the sacrificial fire, by means of flesh, in order to destroy the asuras, and the as. began to waste away and were destroyed by the gods. thence to yaayaata tirtha, where, at a sacrifice of king yayaati naahusha, the sarasvati produced milk and clarified butter, whereafter yayaati went to heaven. once again yayaati performed a sacrifice there, and sarasvati gave to each of the brahmans everything for which he cherished a wish they regarded the gifts as made to them by the king, and praised and blessed him . and g. were pleased. thence baladeva proceeded to the tirtha vasishthaapavaaha . requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana told the history of vasishthaapavaaha, and why it is so rapid, and the brahmanicide of indra, who was purified by bathing in that tirtha. thence baladeva went to the tirtha of soma where in days of yore soma had performed the raajasuyaa sacrifice, with atri for his hotri, after which the great battle took place between . and daa dai and a raa named taaraka, in which skanda slew taaraka and obtained the command of the celestial forces in that tirtha is a gigantic ashvattha tree, under whose shade kaarttikeya always resides in person . requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related the investiture of skanda . the tirtha, where in days of yore varuna, the lord of the waters, had been installed by the celestials, is named taijasa. having bathed in that tirtha and aed skanda, bala raama gave gold, etc to the brahmans passing one night there, he became cheerful and happy . requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related the installation of varuna in a former kalpa. thence baladeva proceeded to agnitirtha, where agni, disappearing, became concealed in the shami wood, wherefore the gods repaired to brahmaan, and asked him to create fire. requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related the story of agnitirtha . thence he went to brahmayoni, where brahmaan had exercised his functions of creation in days of yore brahmaan, having bathed in that tirtha with all the gods, created all the tirthas for the gods, according to due rites. thence to kaubera tirtha, where ailavila having practised austerities, obtained the mastery of all treasures, and all kinds of wealth, etc came to him of their own accord. raama there beheld the excellent woods of kubera. thence bala raama went to badarapaacana, where the fruits of every season are always to be found, and where many ascetics and si. are dwelling. requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related the birth of shrutaavati . then baladeva proceeded to indratirtha . thence to raamatirtha, the resort of . and b. ri. thence to yamunaatirtha . thence baladeva, aned with garlands of wild flowers, proceeded to aadityatirtha, where also ri. asita devala obtained great yoga powers . thence bala raama went to the tirtha of soma, where soma had in former days performed the raajasuya sacrifice, and where the great battle was fought about taaraa . thence bala raama proceeded to the tirtha of the muni saarasvata, where, during a drought of twelve years, saarasvata in former days taught the vedas to many brahmans. requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related the history of saarasvata and of dadhica . thence bala raama proceeded to the tirtha of the old maiden . requested by janamejaya, vaisham paayana related the story of the vriddhakanyaa . while there, baladeva heard of the slaughter of shalya. having come out of the environs of samantapancaka, he enquired of the ri. what was the result of a visit to kurukshetra, which they told him . having visited kurukshetra, bala raama proceeded to a large and exceedingly beautiful hermitage, overgrown with madhukas, etc and was told by ri. here vishnu in days of yore undertook austere penances and performed duly all the eternal sacrifices. here a braahmani girl, having from youth observed the vow of brahmacarya, was crowned with success, and, in possession of yoga powers, she proceeded to heaven. the beautiful daughter of shaandilya, a brahmacaarini, who had performed penances difficult to women, went to heaven, and was worshipped by the gods and brahmans. baladeva then began his ascent of himavat, and soon came to the tirtha plakshaprasravana, and thence to the tirtha kaarapavana, where he passed one night. the asylum of mitra and varuna. from kaara pavana that spot on the yamunaa where in days of yore indra, agni, and aryaman had obtained great happiness. then he sat n with ri. and si. in order to listen to their talk. there came ri. naarada, and, asked by bala raama, he told him all that had happened to the kurus, including the names of those chiefs that had fallen, and of those that were still alive, and asked him to go to the field to witness the mace encounter between bhima and duryodhana, which was to take place that very day. bala raama then bade farewell, and dismissed all those that had accompanied him to dvaarakaa, and descended from himavat and plakshaprasravana, and sang a verse in praise of the sarasvati. then he ascended a chariot with goodly steeds, and arrived on the field .
baalagraha . b, .
balaaka . f, the hunter balaaka used to slay animals for the livelihood of his sons and wives, and thus he also supported his parents and others that depended upon him always speaking the truth and never harbouring malice. devoted to the duties of his own order. one having found no other animal, he slew a blind beast of prey while it was drinking water. a shower of flowers fell from the skies a celestial chariot took him to heaven, while aps etc were singing. that beast of prey had by austerities obtained a boon, and had become the cause of the destruction of all creatures. for this reason he was made blind by brahman.
bala raama .
balh, also bahl .
baalhi jaata .
baalhika5 . baalhika3.
baalhika6 . baalhika3.
baalhika7, a people v. baahika v. baalhika3, v. baalhika3 v. baalhika3 .
bali1 . d, . b, .
bali2 . balisudeshnaadirghatamasshudraa anga. vanga. kalinga. pundra. suhma kaakshivat sons
. b one after having subjugated all as indra asked brahmaan where bali now was, he who was vaayu, etc. . brahmaan said that bali might now have taken his birth among camels or bulls, etc and be staying in a deserted house he told indra not to slay him, but to ask him for instruction in morality. indra roamed over the earth on airaavata, and found bali in a deserted house in the form of an ass. indra scoffed at him, and asked if he did not grieve, and where his, gandharvas had gone who in former days used to dance before him, and also about the garland given to him by brahmaan. bali said when thou becomest like me, thou wilt not indulge in speech like this . bali said that men, p g snakes, and raa. were under his sway in days gone by, and that all creatures used to flatter him but he did not grieve at all in reality it is time that creates and destroys all things, though living creatures brag of ng this or that this royal glory ...s not dwell long in one place she had dwelt in thousands of indras before thee, who were very much superior to thee...knowing thee to be full of vanity, she will very soon desert thee . indra saw shri, aned with head plumes, etc issue out of bali, who did not know whether she was an as. damsel or a celestial one or a human one indra asked her who she was, as she stood there like maayaa herself she said virocana did not know me bali s not know me the learned called me dusahaa etc. thou knowest me not, o indra, nor s any one of the deities know me nor the creator, nor the ordainer rules over me it is time that moves me from one place to another not disregard bali. bali has fallen off from truth, etc. formerly he was devoted to the brahmans, etc. but latterly he began to cherish feelings of animosity towards the brahmans and touched clarified butter with soiled hands therefore desert him and shall henceforth dwell in thee there is none among g as or raa. that can keep me for ever. requested by indra, she told him how she might be able to reside in him permanently, dividing herself into four parts, according to the ordinance laid n in the vedas one to be established on earth, one in the waters, one in fire, one among the good, while indra should continue to protect her. bali said that when the sun would shine only upon the region of brahmaan in the middle of sumeru, then a great battle between the gods and the asuras would again occur, and in that fight bali would certainly vanquish them all. indra said that brahmaan had commanded him never to kill him never will come the day when the sun will shine only from the meridian brahmaan has before this laid n the laws that regulate the suns motions... bali proceeded towards the south indra proceeded towards the north and ascended the skies . b bhishma said after the battle between the gods and the asuras, in which a large number of dai. and daa. fell, bali became king. he was deceived by vishnu, who once more established his sway over all the worlds. indra was once more invested with the sovereignty of the gods, etc. the three worlds once more swelled with prosperity, and brahmaan became glad of heart. at that time indra, accompanied by r aa a . ri g si etc seated on the four tusked airaavata, made a progress through all the worlds. once he saw bali vairocani within a certain mountain cave on the sea shore. bali showed no signs of sorrow or agitation. indra asked him how it was that he was so unmoved thou art bound with varunas noose and hast been struck with my thunderbolt. bali said what am now, thou wilt be in the future, explaining that only time rules the destiny of men that thou regardest thyself as the actor is the root of all sorrow in the course of time many thousands of indras and of deities have been swept away yuga after yuga, and will be swept away in future.. just as prithu, etc though they were devoted to the vedas and vedio rites, etc and though all of them were the offspring of dakshas daughters those, that are the measure of thy sway, will surely come to an end aa r saa and m. were all vanquished by me, etc. indras panegyric on bali. indra left the spot and was praised by the m. ri. fire once more began to bear the libations, etc. .
bali vaasava samvaada, v. before balihaa.
ballava, the name which bhimasena paandava gave himself when dwelling with king viraata, .
ballavaa, v. mallavaa, a people.
balotkataa . u, .
baana1 . u, . b, .
baana2 . u, .
barbara, pl. .
baarhaspata . .
barhishad1 . b, .
barhishada, v. barhishad2.
bhadraa . j, .
bhadrashaalavana, v. saala.
bhadraashva . in bh. is a large forest of bhadrashaalas and a huge tree kaalaamra, which always has fruits and flowers, a yojana in height, aed by si. and caa. the men there are all white, with great energy and strength the women of the complexion of lilies, very beautiful, etc. they live, years. drinking the juice of the kaalaamra, they continue youthful for ever .
bhadrakaali . b, .
bhadrakaali . u, .
bhadrasaalavana . h, .
bhaga1 . u, . d, . bhaganetra, etc. is often used to signify love, etc. .
bhagadaa . u, .
bhaganandaa . u, .
. sanjaya informs dhritaraashtra of bhishmas fall in battle . dhrita raashtras lament and inquiries . sanjaya, praising vyaasa for his yoga power, i.e. the celestial vision he had given him, began his discourse on the battle. duryodhana gave dushaasana instructions about the protection of bhishma from shikhandin . the two hosts arrayed at sunrise . shakuni, etc stood each at the head of an akshauhini the under bhishma stood in advance of the whole army. the srinjayas, headed by dhrishtadyumna, looked like small animals beholding a lion . on that day soma approached the region of the pitris. omens. every morning bhishma and drona prayed for victory for the paandavas, though they must fight for dhritaraashtra according to their pledge bhishma briefly addressed the kuru army, mentioning naabhaga, etc as examples. karna, with his friends and relatives, laid aside his weapons owing to bhishma. description of the proceedings of the army, especially of bhishma, etc. . dushaasana, etc protected bhishma from behind, etc. . yudhishthira told arjuna, according to the words of the m. ri. brihaspati, to array the troops in needle mouthed array. arjuna said that he would make a vajra array, which was designed by indra they would all seek shelter with bhima. the leaders were bhimasena, etc. . omens . when the sun rose the kauravas stood facing the west, the paandavas facing the east. disposition of the two armies duryodhana, etc. . yudhishthira sorrowfully addressed arjuna, who consoled him with his truth, righteousness, etc which naarada, bhishma, and drona knew, and which were a powerful aid towards victory according to braahmans words to indra, etc on the occasion of the battle between the gods and the asuras victory clings to krishna it was by choosing him that the gods under indra had vanquished the asuras . disposition of the troops in the paandava army shikhandin, etc. . at krishnas instance arjuna recited a hymn to durgaa. durgaa appeared and gave him assurances of victory. merits of this hymn . the combatants of both armies were cheerful, etc. . before drona, duryodhana compared the combatants of the paandava army bhima, etc with his own drona, etc. . krishna, etc blew paancajanya, etc. . arjuna asked krishna to place his chariot between the two armies, so that he might see who were assembled to fight. beholding his relatives, etc arjuna was filled with compassion and overcome with despondency, and refused to fight . krishna appealed to arjuna to shake off his despondency, but in vain. krishna then declared to arjuna the nature and the attributes of the soul, and the folly of grieving for the dead, and exhorted him to comply with the duties of his order by fighting fairly, and to apply himself to work for works sake, and not for the sake of its results. krishna spoke of contemplation on the saankhyas and yogins on devotion to work on his reiterated births on the best way on abanment of actions and application to actions he has the right view who considers saankhya and yoga as one on the means of rising to devotion on krishna identified with braahman on the nature of braahman on krishna as the pervader of the whole universe, and as the enjoyer of all sacrifice on krishna as the source of the gods, etc. arjuna believed what krishna said, and what also had been said by all the ri and the . ri. naarada, and asita devala and vyaasa. krishna declared his divine perfections to arjuna, and disclosed his supreme sovereign form he was praised by arjuna he discoursed on the two kinds of worshippers on the body and the soul, etc the supreme object of knowledge on the three gunas on the symbolical ashvattha on godlike and demoniac natures and births on the threefold nature of faith on renunciation and abanment. arjunas delusion is destroyed, and he once more takes up the gaandiva .
bhagavadyaana i.e. bhagavadyaanaparvan.
bhagavad yaana . krishna, after some time, desirous of beholding his father, left khaandavaprastha, having taken leave of prithaa, subhadraa, krishnaa, and dhaumya. the paandavas, etc followed him half a yojana, yudhishthira causing daaruka to stand aside and, himself taking the reins, riding on krishnas golden chariot with garuda on the banner, and yoked with shaivya and sugriva. then he caused them to retire, and with saattvata and daaruka reached dvaarakaa, worshipped by ugrasena, etc. and having embraced pradyumna, shaamba, nishatha, shaarudeshna, gada, aniruddha, and bhaanu, and having worshipped aahuka and his old father and mother and bala, he entered the dwelling of rukmini. yudhishthira at indraprastha sported with draupadi, dismissing all his friends, brothers, and sons .
. yudhishthira spoke to krishna about the mission of sanjaya and the wickedness of duryodhana and dhritaraashtra though he was supported by the kaashis, etc he asked for only five villages or towns, and complained of the cruel duties of the kshattriya order. krishna said he was willing to go to the kuru court in order to negotiate a peace, and yudhishthira, after some hesitation, agreed to the proposal . krishna mentioned the offences of the kauravas, and said that he thought war to be certain all the omens pointed in that direction therefore yudhishthira should collect everything needed for battle . bhima told krishna to speak mildly and not threaten the kurus with war. just as, when dharma became extinct, kali was born in the race of the asuras, who flourished with prosperity and blazed with energy, so was udaavarta born among the haihayas, etc. . these vile individuals sprang up, at the end of each yuga, in their respective races for the destruction of their kinsmen so has duryodhana been born at the end of the yuga among us the kurus. yudhishthira and arjuna too are averse from war . krishna scoffed at bhima for his unusual mildness, though he had sworn, as the sun journeyed around meru, to slay duryodhana with his mace . bhima mentioned his well known valour, and said that he was for bearing their injuries, only for fear lest the bharata race might be extirpated . krishna explained that he had only spoken through affection . arjuna told krishna to strive sincerely to bring about peace for he was able to whatever he would but if krishna deemed the destruction of the kurus to be preferable, let it be effected soon he mentioned the offences of duryodhana towards themselves and draupadi. at all events, krishna best knew what was for their good . krishna said he would try to bring about what was beneficial to both the paandavas and the kurus to make peace was within his power he would all that could be e by human exertion, but he could not control destiny duryodhana, etc would never make peace by giving up the king many a time he had tried to withdraw krishna from arjuna about a year ago, on the occasion of attacking viraatas kine, bhishma had solicited duryodhana about this very peace . nakula told krishna to act according to his own opinion, disregarding all he had heard. their attachment for the king was now greater than ever, as nobody could encounter yudhishthira, etc. . he should first speak mildly and then threaten duryodhana. he did not bt that he would accomplish his object, for vidura, etc would understand him . sahadeva said that krishna ought to provoke a war, because of the insults to draupadi. saatyaki approved of this, and thus did all the heroes present . krishnaa approved of the words of sahadeva and saatyaki, mentioned weeping the injustice of the dhaartaraashtras, and that they had refused to give even five villages, avisthala, etc and was of opinion that there was no necessity for going thither in order to make peace. krishna consoled her thou wilt soon see thy husbands slay their enemies, and crowned by prosperity . arjuna once more besought krishna to try to make peace. on the next morning, at the maitra hour, in the month of kaumuda, under the constellation revati, at the season of dews, autumn having departed, krishna caused shinis grandson saatyaki to prepare his chariot they yoked to it shaibya, sugriva, meghapushpa, and balaahaka. garuda came and perched on the flagstaff. and taking saatyaki also upon it, he set out under auspicious omens vasishtha, etc and . ri. and b. ri. walked around him . yudhishthira, etc followed him on the way, and told him to salute kunti, etc. . arjuna said he was for peace, but if duryodhana would not give them what they demanded, he would annihilate the kshattriya race. bhima uttered a terrible shout, so that the bowmen trembled in fear, and steeds and elephants were seen to void urine and fรฆces. when all the kings had desisted following him, krishna set out with daaruka. on his way he met with some rishis, and jamadagnis son, the friend of brahmaan, told him that the . ri brahmans, and r. ri who had witnessed the former feats of gods and asuras, had come to see and hear the assemblage at haastinapura . ten chariot warriors followed in krishnas train, and foot soldiers and attendants by hundreds, carrying provisions in abundance. sinister omens occurred over haastinapura but where krishna passed everything became auspicious. at vrikasthala he passed the night . meanwhile dhritaraashtra, having heard from his spies that krishna was coming, respect fully addressed bhishma, etc and said to duryodhana and his counsellors that krishna should be received with the greatest honour let pavilions be set up on the road, etc. bhishma, etc approved of it, and duryodhana made the arrangements. but krishna did not even glance at it . when krishna was staying at vrikasthala and intended to come to haastinapura the next morning, dhritaraashtra spoke to vidura about how he in tended to treat krishna in order to honour him . vidura blamed dhritaraashtra for his insincerity the right hospitality to be offered to krishna is to make peace with the paandavas, and thou wilt not give them even five villages, and seekest only to separate krishna from the paandavas . duryodhana said that it was of no use to bestow wealth and honour upon krishna, as he could never be separated from the paandavas, and he will only think that we are worshipping him out of fear. bhishma advised them to as krishna would say. duryodhana declared that he would imprison krishna. dhritaraashtra and all his counsellors became deeply afflicted, especially as krishna came as an ambassa. inflamed with rage, bhishma rose and left the place . the next morning krishna rose at daybreak and arrived in haastinapura, and was solemnly received by all the dhaartaraashtras, etc and the citizens . having saluted dhritaraashtra, etc he went to the abode of vidura . in the afternoon he visited kunti, who wept for her sons, comparing yudhi shthira to ambarisha, etc mentioning the feats of bhima sena, comparing arjuna to kaartavirya, etc and also inquiring about sahadeva and nakula, and likewise about draupadi, mentioning how she was dragged by dushaasana, while baahlika, etc grieved but especially she praised vidura. full years have gone since duryodhana first exiled my son. she mentioned the invisible voice on the night of arjunas birth, and trusted to dharma and the creator and krishna. she asked krishna to tell her sons that she besought them to avenge themselves and draupadi, as even death was better than a life gained by meanness. krishna consoled her, and then departed for duryodhanas mansion . krishna entered duryodhanas palace, where he also beheld dushaasana, karna, and shakuni. duryodhana asked him to dine at his house but krishna did not accept the invitation, because he hated the paandavas, and went to viduras abode, where drona, etc came to him . vidura warned krishna against duryodhana, who would never make peace, because he trusted bhishma, etc and distrusted krishna . krishna said that he knew duryodhana but great would be the merit earned by him who liberates the whole earth from the noose of death and even if he should meet failure, the merit of that intended act would become his moreover, have come here in order that unrighteous, foolish, and inimical persons shall not afterwards be free to say that krishna made no attempt to restrain them from slaughtering one another, though he was competent to so. then he laid himself n for sleep . in the morning duryodhana and shakuni came and invited him to go to the council where dhritaraashtra and bhishma, etc were present he rode thither in his chariot with daaruka, putting on his gem kaustubha, and being protected by the vrishnis, and he was followed by vidura in his own chariot, and by duryodhana and shakuni in one chariot, and by saatyaki and kritavarman and the other chariot warriors of the vrishni race in chariots and on steeds and elephants . then he entered the court with vidura and saatyaki before him sat karna and duryodhana, behind him the vrishnis with kritavarman. bhishma, drona, etc with dhritaraashtra rose up in his honour, etc. he beheld the rishis staying in the skies with naarada at their head, and caused bhishma to offer them seats. dushaasana gave a seat to saatyaki, and vivimshati one to kritavarman . krishna spoke of the just complaints and claims of the paandavas, and said that with them as his allies dhritaraashtra would become invincible, having bhishma, etc. . let not the peoples of the earth be exterminated if thou regainest thy natural disposition, the earth may continue to be peopled as now. all the kings there present highly applauded the words of krishna in their hearts, but none of them ventured to say anything in the presence of duryodhana . jaamadagnya then told dambhodbhavopaakhyaana . great, indeed, was that feat of old achieved by nara. naaraayana again became superior to nara in consequence of many additional qualities. therefore, o king, before such weapons as kaakudika, etc are placed on the string of the gaandiva, go thou to dhananjaya, laying aside thy pride these weapons have other names corresponding to the eight passions . maataliyopaa khyaana . after kanva had spoken, krishna, bhishma, and naarada in vain admonished duryodhana. naarada related the old story gaalavacarita, and the fall of yayaati . dhritaraashtra complained that duryodhana never listened to his, etc words, and asked krishna to admonish him. krishna reminded duryodhana of what was agreeable to dhritaraashtra, etc and warned him against dushaasana, etc. . bhishma, etc could not fight against bhima and arjuna, who had vanquished g y as and pn. at khaandavaprastha who encountered many at viraatas city, etc. . bhishma, drona, vidura, and dhritaraashtra recommended duryodhana to follow the counsels of krishna . bhishma and drona warned duryodhana against krishna, etc. . duryodhana complained that krishna always censured him in the match of dice blame could not be attached to him. he quoted this saying of maatanga, one should always keep himself erect... . krishna indignantly answered duryodhana, men tioning his offences against the paandavas, vaaranaavata, etc. . dushaasana said to duryodhana that the kauravas would bind him, and bhishma, drona, and dhritaraashtra would make duryodhana, karna, and dushaasana over to the paandavas. disregarding vidura, etc duryodhana went out of the court in anger. krishna blamed them for not having forcibly seized and bound duryodhana think the time has come for ng this he reminded them of how he had himself slain kamsa, and then installed ugrasena on the throne, for the benefit of all the yaadavas, andhakas, and vrishnis and that when the gods and asuras, etc were arrayed for battle parameshthin had commanded dharma to bind the daiteyas and the daanavas and make them over to varuna, who having bound them with dharmas noose and also with his own, kept them within the depths of the ocean. in the same way they ought to bind duryodhana, etc. . dhritaraashtra caused vidura to fetch gaandhaari, who blamed dhritaraashtra, because he had by his indulgence caused duryodhana now to be the slave of delusion and incapable of being turned back she then caused vidura to fetch duryodhana, whom she rebuked severely and asked to obey the words of his well wishers dhritaraashtra, etc. bhishma and dhritaraashtra and baahlika gave the paandavas their share from fear of a disunion. if bhishma, etc became enraged the population of the earth would be exterminated. the affection of bhishma, drona, and kripa towards the paandavas and the dhaartaraashtras was equal it is never seen in this world that men acquire wealth by avarice . disregarding the words of his mother, duryodhana again went away in anger, and began to consult with shakuni, and duryodhana, etc resolved upon seizing krishna then the paandavas with the somakas would become depressed. saatyaki knew it, caused kritavarman to array the troops at the entrance of the court, and informed krishna, dhritaraashtra, and vidura, but laughed at the project. vidura told dhritaraashtra that the last hour of all his sons was at hand. krishna said to dhritaraashtra that if his sons perpetrated such a deed yudhishthiras object would be accomplished, for this very seizing them with all who follow them, can make them over to the paandavas will not, however, commit any such censurable deed that can proceed only from wrath and a sinful understanding. dhritaraashtra once more caused vidura to fetch duryodhana with his brothers, etc and rebuked them t thou not know krishna, who is incapable of being defeated in battle by men, g as and u. vidura reminded duryodhana that at the gates of saubha the monkey dvivida covered krishna with a shower of stones, but could not seize him nor could naraka with all the daanavas at praagjyotisha slaying naraka, krishna brought away, damsels and married them all. in the city of nirmocana, mighty asuras failed to seize him with their nooses. he also mentioned putanaa shakuni, etc. . krishna reminded duryodhana that he was not alone, and from his body issued myriads of gods, etc. all the kings were terrified and closed their eyes, except bhishma, drona, vidura, sanjaya, and the rishis for krishna gave them celestial sight, etc. then he went out with saatyaki and kritavarman. the rishis naarada, etc vanished. he found daaruka waiting with his chariot drawn by shaibya, and kritavarman, who had mounted his chariot. dhritaraashtra excused himself, saying that he was powerless. krishna bade farewell to dhritaraashtra, etc and set out, followed by bhishma, etc to the abode of kunti . kunti asked him to admonish yudhishthira to attend to the duties of his own order, and not contemplate virtue alone, citing mucukunda . it is the king that creates the krita, tretaa, or dvaapara age if he creates the krita age, he enjoys heaven exceedingly if he creates the tretaa, he enjoys heaven, but not exceedingly if he causes the dvaapara age to set in, he enjoys heaven according to his due if he promotes the kali age, he will reside in hell for countless years. that understanding according to which thou art now acting, is not in accordance with the intentions of paandu, or myself, or thy grandsire, when we uttered blessings on thee before, etc. . in this connection is cited an old story . vidulaaputrashaasana . kunti asked krishna to remind arjuna of the voice heard at his birth to bhima he should say that the time has come for that in view of which a kshattriya lady brings forth a son krishnaa he should praise for her behaviour towards the paandavas he should remind nakula and sahadeva, that they must not forgive the insults towards draupadi, that was worse than the defeat at dice and the exile arjuna should always tread in the path pointed out by draupadi bhima and arjuna are a pair of yamas capable of slaying the very gods they should revenge the harsh words said by dushaasana to bhima. krishna bade farewell to bhishma, etc took karna upon his chariot and set out with saatyaki, deliberating with karna for a long time. then he dismissed karna, and driven by daaruka the steeds soon reached upaplavya. the kurus assembled and talked about krishna . bhishma and drona reminded duryodhana of what kunti had said to krishna, and the exploits of arjuna they recommended peace fearful omens appeared . duryodhana was cheerless and silent. bhishma complained. drona said that his affection for arjuna was greater than for ashvatthaaman duryodhana ought to have followed the counsels of the elders yudhishthira was invincible the paandavas had procured wealth from kuberas abode the periods of our lives have run out etc. . requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related the conversation between krishna and karna . krishna disclosed to karna that he was virtually the son of paandu, and on the side of his father was related to the paandavas, on the side of his mother to the vrishnis. he ought to come with him to the paandavas, being the elder brother of yudhishthira, and be installed as king by dhaumya, etc yudhishthira being his heir presumptive and ruling the king under him during the sixth period draupadi also will come to thee let the dravidas, etc walk before thee . karna admitted that he was virtually the son of paandu, kunti having, while a maiden, born him to surya and then abaned him. but the suta adhiratha had taken him to his home from her affection for him raadhaas breasts were filled with milk that very and she held his urine and fรฆces how can one like us....deprive her of her pinda adhiratha regarded karna as a son, and karna regarded adhiratha as a father he had caused all the rites of infancy to be performed on karna according to the scriptures he had caused the name vasushena to be bestowed upon him by the brahmans when karna attained to youth he married wives according to adhirathas selection with them he had begotten sons and grandsons. through duryodhana he had enjoyed sovereignty for thirteen years. his many sacri fices had always been with sutas, as had also his family rites and marriage rites. it was only after having got hold of karna that duryodhana had decided upon war with the paandavas, karna having been chosen as the antagonist of arjuna. their discourse ought to be kept secret, lest yudhi shthira should refuse to accept the king and if the empire becomes mine shall certainly make it over to duryodhana only. he praised yudhishthira, etc and the weapons of arjuna, comparing the combat to a sacrifice and bhimas drinking the blood of dushaasana to the soma drinking, etc. . krishna said the victory of the paandavas was very certain he described arjunas banner, made by bhaumana by celestial illusion his aindra, aagneya, and maaruta weapons, etc. then all signs of the krita, tretaa, and dvaapara ages will disappear. he forebade bhimasenas dancing, having quaffed the blood of dushaasana, etc. . returning hence, say to bhishma, etc that the present month is a delightful one days hence it will be the day of the new moon, presided over by indra let the battle commence then . karna ascribed the approaching destruction to shakuni, etc and mentioned diverse sinister visions of planets, etc and he had seen in a vision, foreboding victory, yudhishthira, etc and the inverse respecting bhishma, etc. . karna embraced krishna, descended from his chariot, and riding in his own chariot, which was decked with gold, came back with us . vidura approached kunti and spoke of the state and disposition of yudhishthira, etc and the allies of yudhishthira . kunti thought with grief on those who were going to fight . especially she was afraid of karna she recollected the boon of durvaasas and its consequences . she went to karna, who was standing performing his prayers on the bank of gangaa with his face turned towards the east and his arms upraised and she stayed behind him, waiting for the completion of his prayers. then, turning round, he beheld kunti . kunti disclosed to karna his birth, mentioned the justice of the paandava cause and the injustice of duryodhanas, and besought him to join the paandavas . surya corroborated the words of kunti. but karna represented to her the great injury she had e him he could not now frustrate the hope of the kauravas but except arjuna thy other sons shall not be slain by me. they then left the spot, turning into different directions . at upaplavya krishna represented to the paandavas all that had happened at haastinapura. in the night, yudhi shthira again brought krishna into their midst, and caused him to repeat what had been said by bhishma, etc. bhishma had related his own life he mentioned a duel with raama, where vicitravirya fled, having been deserted by his subjects upon vicitraviryas death anarchy prevailed in the king, and indra did not give a drop of rain afflicted by hunger and maladies, the subjects then asked bhishma in vain to ascend the throne when paandu became king, his sons must obtain their paternal inheritance . drona had related the life of paandu. vidura had asked bhishma to go to the woods with him and dhritaraashtra, or to bind duryodhana and rule the king with the paandavas. gaandhaari proved that the king by right belonged to the paandavas and their sons and grandsons, and to no others . dhritaraashtra had repeated to duryodhana the genealogy of the kuru race from soma, mentioning especially that yayaati had placed his youngest son puru on the throne and that devaapis installation was forbidden by the brahmans and all aged persons because of a skin disease, and as baahlika abaned his father and brother and obtained the wealthy king of his maternal uncle, shaantanu, the youngest of the three brothers, became king. being defective of a limb, was likewise excluded by paandu at his death the king must pass to his sons ...thou art not the son of a king, and therefore hast no right to the king . krishna continued his relation duryodhana had repeatedly instructed the kings, saying to day is pushya march ye. eleven akshauhinis have been assembled headed by bhishma .
bhagavat is often applied to the names of persons of high merit, especially religious merit, or used to design them alone. the most high, . krishna, vishnu, naaraayana. krishna, . the most high, vishnu, naaraayana. vishnu, . the most high, krishna, naaraayana naaraayana, . the most high, krishnaa, vishnu. brahmaan, . shiva, etc . indra, . agni, q.v. kubera, . dharma, . naarada, . kanva, . dhritaraashtra, .
bhaagavata . c, . b, .
bhagiratha bh. caused the shore of gangaa bhaagirathi to be covered by flights of steps made of gold he presented the brahmans with, of damsels decked with ornaments of gold, etc. . it is related how gangaa became his daughter and then his son g. sang all this before ri and men. at last he ascended to brahmaloka through the grace of the brahmans . b, .
bhaima, bhimaakramakartaaro bhimavamshajaa vaa schol .
bhangaasvana . b, .
. b . bhishma said in days of yore lived r. ri. bhangaasvana, who, being childless, from desire of obtaining issue performed the agnishtuta, that is disliked by indra, but is approved of by men desirous of offspring, in order to purge themselves of their sins . he had sons. indra began to look for an occasion against him. once, on a hunting expedition, he was bewildered by indra, and, afflicted with thirst, he plunged into a lake after having caused his horse to drink, and found himself changed into a woman. he took leave of his wives and children and retired to the woods, joined an ascetic and bore him sons, whom he took to his former children, and made them all enjoy the king as their joint property. filled with rage, indra, in the form of a brahman, repaired to bhangaasvanas capital, and, referring them to the example of the gods and the asuras, caused the half brothers to slay each other. then, in the form of a brahman, he came to the spot where bhangaasvana lived as an ascetic lady, afflicted with grief, and told him that he was indra, and why he was angry, but was gratified and granted him a boon. he asked that those sons of his should revive that were born by him as a woman, because the affection entertained by a woman is much greater than that which is entertained by a man. indra revived all his children, and told him to choose which ever sex he liked, that of woman or that of man. he chose to remain a woman, because in sexual intercourse the pleasure that women enjoy is always much greater than what is enjoyed by men. indra proceeded to heaven .
bharadvaaja1 . y, . aa, . b, . b, aanushaasan.vitahavyop.aashramapadam sya priest of divodaasajyeshtha putro brihaspateaanushaasan.vanquished the vitahavyas and the ainasbisastainyop.shapathavidhic. bhaaaanushasan.sa gautama the fifth of the seven dhaneshvarasya gurava, dwells in the northamong the learned brahmans in the northgurushishyasamvaadaprajaapatiau
bhaaradvaaja1. b, . b, .
bharata1 bis . with his three wives bharata begat altogether nine sons, with whom he was not pleased, as they were not like him their mothers therefore became angry and slew them . bharata then, per forming great sacrifices, obtained from bharadvaaja a son named bhumanyu, who became his heir apparent when a child in the forest bh. . bound the lions and checked the tigers, etc whence he was called sarvadamana, and his mother forbade him to torture animals. he performed horse sacrifices on the banks of the sarasvati, and on the banks of the gangaa then once more, horse sacrifices and raajasuyas, etc etc. he gave, billions of kine of the purest gold to kanva. the gods with indra and brahmans set up his sacrificial stake . to brahmans he gave horses, elephants, etc . b cf bharatadaushmantim shaakuntalamdaushmantikhadgotpattik.daushmantivishvaamitrop.bhsyaanvayeaanushaasanik.cakravartitriloke vishrutam viram bharatan ca prakirttayet gavaamayena yajnena yeneshtam vai krite yuge rantidevam mahaadevam kirttayet paramadyutimcakravartiashvamedhik.daushmanti shaakuntalasvargaarohanap.
bhaarata3, ti, .
bhaaratavarsha . bhaarata2.
bharga, pl. .
bhaarga, pl. .
bhaargava1, pl .
bhaargava2, pl a people in bhaaratavarsha, .
bhaargava1, adj .
bhaargava1, the potter, .
bhaarunda . g, .
bhaasa . g, .
bhaashya . b, .
bhaasi . do. .
bhaasvara. u, .
bhauma3 . b, .
bhaumana . h, .
. b bhishma said ushanas became engaged in ng what was disagreeable to the gods for an adequate cause . kubera, the chief of y. and raa is the lord of the treasury of indra. ushanas, by yoga, entered kubera, and deprived him of his liberty and robbed him of all his wealth. kubera repaired to shiva, who prepared to slay ushanas with his lance. ushanas placed himself on the point of shivas lance. shiva bent the lance with his hand, whence it was called pinaaka, and threw ushanas into his mouth and swallowed him, and ushanas began to wander there. mahaadeva entered the waters and remained there like an immovable stake of wood for millions of years. then he rose from the mighty lake and brahmaan approached him. shiva saw that ushanas within his stomach had become greater in con sequence of those penances of his. he once more betook himself to yoga meditation. ushanas, filled with anxiety, began to wander within his stomach, and to sing his praises but rudra had stopped all his outlets at last he let him go out through his urethra. thence he came to be called shukra, and became unable to attain the central point of the firmament. umaa prevented shiva from slaying him, and ushanas became her son .
bhavadaa . u, .
bhaavini . u, .
bhavishya c, .
bhayankara1 . do a vishvadeva .
bhayankari . u, .
bhedi . u, .
bherisvanamahaasvanaa . u, .
bhima2 . u, .
bhima3 . b, .
bhima7, a deva gandharva mauneya .
bhima9, an ancient king .
bhima1, vidarbha king .
bhima1, one of the yajnamusha devaa .
bhima1, son of dhritaraashtra .
bhimaa, a river in bhaaratavarsha .
bhimabala1, one of the yajnamusha devaa .
bhimabala2, a son of dhritaraashtra .
bhimashara, a son of dhritaraashtra .
bhimakadalikhandapravesha . there they dwelt for six nights. suddenly a wind from the north east brought a celestial lotus of, petals, which krishnaa presented to yudhishthira she sent bhima to bring others, in order to carry them to their hermitage in kaamyaka. bhima proceeded along the slopes of the gandhamaadana the lions, etc fled invisible, the wives of yakshas and gandharvas stared at him. after having bathed in a lake, he blew his shell and began to proceed into a plaintain wood, but was arrested by his brother the ape hanumat, who for his good obstructed the way to heaven, saying that this was the path to the devaloka, impassable by mortals, save the way of siddhi . hanumat said he was suffering from illness and could not rise but bhima would not leap over him, and could not remove his tail. hanumad bhima samvaada .
bhimaratha1, a son of dhritaraashtra .
bhimasena1, v. bhima6.
bhimasenarasapaana . the paandavas were far superior in strength and skill to the dhaartaraashtras, and bhima tormented the dhaartaraashtras. duryodhana then built a palace at pramaanakoti, on the banks of the gangaa, in order to sport in the water there. there he invited the paandavas and poured kaalakutaka poison into the food of bhima, and when bhima had lost his senses, duryodhana bound him and threw him into the water, where he sunk n to the dwelling of the naagas, who bit him, but could not penetrate his thick skin. the immovable kaalakutaka poison was neutralised by the movable serpent poison. bhima awoke and began to crush the serpents, until vaasuki came, and, informed by aaryaka that he was the daughters son of aaryakas daughters son, let him drink as much of their rasa as he could. he drank eight kundas, and then was laid on a bed . when the kauravas and paandavas had returned to haastinapura, yudhishthira asked kunti if bhima had come home. vidura consoled her. on the eighth day bhima awoke from his slumber, bathed in the holy waters, ate of the paramaanna, etc and was placed by the naagas in the same gardens, whence he ran home. yudhishthira ordered him to keep silence on this accident, and the paandavas became very vigilant from this day . duryodhana, karna, and shakuni had recourse to numerous other contrivances in order to kill the paandavas, who, though knowing it, yet, in accordance with the advice of vidura, suppressed their indignation. seeing the princes passing their time in play, dhritaraashtra appointed gautama as their preceptor .
bhimasenaatmaja, i.e. ghatotkaca, .
bhimasunu =, .
bhimasuta =, .
bhimavega, son of dhritaraashtra .
bhini . u, .
bhishmaka2 . c, . c, .
bhishmaparvan . c, .
bhishma satyavati samvaada . satyavati in vain asked bhishma to ascend the throne and marry the wis of vicitravirya, in order to propagate the race . bhishma adduced the examples of parashu raama and of dirghatamas . thus many kshattriyas have sprung from the seed of brahmans. vyaasa raised offspring in the wis of vicitravirya .
bhishmasya svargaarohanika parva .
bhishmotpatti . gangaa agreed to become the wife of shaantanu on the condition that she would leave him the moment he interfered with her or spoke an unkind word to her. they had eight children but seven of them were, as soon as they were born, thrown into the water by her. the eighth was rescued by shaantanus interfering. but then gangaa, telling him who she was, and that his sons were the eight vasus who had been cursed by vasishtha, left him .
bhogavati . u, .
bhogin, pl .
bhogipati . b, .
bhoja, pl. .
bhoja3 maartikaavata .
bhojakata . c, . d, .
bhrigos tirtham. e, where parashuraama had regained his energy that had been taken away by raama daasharathi.
bhrigu1 . c, . u, . w, . hh, . b, . b
bhrigu2 . b, .
bhrigu, pl. . u, . e, . b, . f, .
bhulinga. d, .
bhumi personified, etc.
bhumiparvan . dhritaraashtra wishes to hear about the extent of the ocean, of shaakadvipa, etc. . sanjaya describes the seven islands, the moon and the sun, and raahu. jambu parvata extends for, yojanas. the extent of the salt ocean is twice this it has many kings, mountains, etc peopled by si. and caa and is circular in form. then shaakadvipa . in the north is the ocean of clarified butter then that of curds then that of wine then another of water. the extent of the islands is bled as they proceed further and further towards the north. in the island in the middle is the great mountain gaura of red arsenic in the western the mountain krishna, the friend of naaraayana, where keshava guards celestial gems and bestows happiness on creatures. the clump of kusha grass in kusha dvipa and the shaalmali tree in shaalmalika are aed. in the kraunca island also the mountain mahaa kraunca is always aed by all four castes of men. there is the huge mountain gomanta, whereon, with the emancipated, the puissant naaraayana hari always resides. in kushadvipa are six principal mountains the intervening spaces increase in the ratio of one to two as they proceed further and further towards the north and seven varshas, where . and g etc sport, and the inhabitants never die, and there are no robbers or mlecchas all the residents are almost white and very delicate. in the kraunca island are six mountains the intervening spaces increase in the ratio of one to two there are seven countries, inhabited by . and g. the people are almost white. in the island of pushkara is the mountain pushkara, with jewels and gems there prajaapati always dwells, aed by . and m. ri. diverse gems from jambu dvipa are used there. in all these islands truth, etc increase in the ratio of one to two, as the islands become more and more remote. the land in all those islands comprises but one country, for that is said to be one country in which one religion is met with. prajaapati always dwells there, protecting those islands. cooked food comes there of itself. after these regions is seen samaa . then he speaks of svarbhaanu, candramas, surya . have now told thee the construction of the universe according to the shaastras. therefore pacify thy son duryodhana. blessing upon the reader .
bhuri . kaurava.
bhurishravas . . b, . compare also the following synonyms bhuridakshina, . shalaagraja, . kaurava, q.v. kauravadaayaada, q.v. kauraveya, q.v. kauravya, q.v. kauravyamukhya, q.v. kurushaardula, q.v. kurushreshtha, q.v. kurudvaha, q.v. kurupungava, q.v. yupaketana, . yupaketu, .
bhurihan . b, .
bhuta, pl .
bhuta, pl. masc .
bhutaanaam mathana u, .
bhutitirthaa . u, .
bhuvabhartri, v. aapa .
bhuvanabhartri, v. agni.
bibhatsu, v. arjuna.
bindusaras . f, there king bhagiratha, beholding gangaa, resided for many years there innumerable sacrificial stakes made of gems and chaitya trees made of gold may be seen. there indra reached perfection by sacrificing there shiva, etc reside there gangaa, issuing from brahmaloka, first showed herself, and then divided herself into seven streams vasvaukasaaraa, etc. .
. b bhishma said the seven ri. kashyapa, etc and arundhati together had one single maidservant, gandaa, who was married to the shudra pashusakha. while they, in days of old, practised penances, preparing themselves for brahmaloka by yoga meditation, there occurred a severe drought shibis son shaibya had in former times given away a son of his as the sacrificial present to the ritvijes that prince now died of starvation impelled by hunger, the rishis cooked his body in a vessel. king shaibya vrishaadarbhi came and offered to give them kine, etc but they refused it that acceptance of gifts from a king was poison they left the spot abaning that flesh. the king sent his ministers with figs, some of which were filled with gold but atri, finding them heavy, refused to take them and so did all of them, and left the spot. filled with wrath, vrishaadarbhi, after having observed penances, poured libations into the fire accompanied by mantras from the fire a hag sprang forth, whom he called yaatudhaani he ordered her to slay the rishis, etc having ascertained their names. while ri. roved within the forest, subsisting upon fruits and roots, they saw a well nourished mendicant with a in good condition arundhati pointed him out to them, and each of them explained the superior condition of this mendicant with reference to one of the points in which he was better situated than they. the wandering mendicant approached them and touched their hand according to custom. one day they beheld a beautiful lake overgrown with lotuses, and desired to gather some lotus stalks urged by vrishaadarbhi, yaatu dhaani, who guarded the lake, would know their names before they took the stalks atri knew that she stood there in order to slay them but they all told their names with their etymological explanations at each explanation yaatudhaani declared that she did not understand it, in consequence of the inflections which the roots had undergone shunasakha calls himself shunasakha sakhi, and as yaatudhaani wishes to hear the name once more in order to understand it, he struck her head with his triple stick, at which she was consumed to ashes. having gathered lotus stalks, they once more plunged into the lake in order to offer oblations of water to the pitris. as they came up, the stalks were nowhere to be seen. they took, each of them, oaths to their innocence but the oath of shunasakha was no oath at all, and he confessed that he had stolen the stalks from desire of testing them he turned out to be indra, who had come to test them, and told them the whole matter about yaatudhaani. they then ascended to heaven in the company of indra himself .
bodha, pl a people .
braahma, adj. . f, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . braahmya.
brahmabhavana . b, . n, . svayambhu bhavana.
brahmabodhyaa, a river .
brahmacaarin1, a gandharva .
brahmashaalaa, a river .
brahmashiras, a celestial weapon . e b. destroys the entire universe at the end of the yuga. it is not known to mahendra, nor to yama, nor to the yaksha king, nor to varuna, nor to vaayu. by this arjuna might obtain victory over karna, bhishma, kripa, and drona, and over daanavas, raakshasas, bhutas, pishaacas, gandharvas, and pannagas when hurled with mantras it produced darts by thousands, maces and arrows. it might be hurled by the eye, by the mind, by words, and by the bow, . b, b. had sprung from the amrita and came to rudra in consequence of tapas. b drona had given b. to arjuna ashvatthaaman asked him for it, and drona unwillingly gave him it. knowing his restlessness, with the command never to use it against men. because of the bitter words of his father, ashvatthaaman began to wander over the earth in grief coming to dvaarakaa he said to krishna that now he had b which drona had obtained from agastya after austere penances he asked krishna for his discus in exchange for that weapon. he was unable even to move the discus. krishna praised arjuna and pradyumna, etc who had never desired his discus, while ashvatthaaman confessed that he would have used it against krishna himself. then he left dvaarakaa, .
brahmadanda1, . brahmashapa.
brahmadarshana. b, .
brahmadatta1, an ancient king . b, . b, .
brahmadatta2, pl. .
brahmadatta pujani samvaada . b, as bhishma had said that from trust great danger arose to kings yudhishthira asked but how would the king maintain himself if he were not to trust anybody bhishma related a bird named pujani lived with king brahmadatta in his palace at kaampilya like jivajivaka, it could mimic the cries of all animals, etc. at one and the same time p. got an offspring and the king a son. p. used every day to go to the shores of the ocean and bring a couple of fruits, one for her own child and one for the prince. one day the prince, when playing with the offspring of p killed it, and then came back to his nurse. when p. had returned to the palace, she wept bitterly, and said that nobody should live with a kshattriya or make friends with him for so long as it suits their purpose, they behave with courtesy but then they throw off the instrument they evil to all, and should never be trusted even after ng an injury they try to soothe. p. then pierced the eyes of the prince, saying that those who avenge an injury never lose their merit by such conduct. thinking that the avenger only squares his account, br. sought to prevail upon p. to remain even after a deadly injury, affection and mutual trust arise between two persons residing together animosity disappears quickly, like water poured upon the leaf of a lotus it is time that s every act who therefore injures whom like fire con suming the fuel, time consumes all creatures what thou hast e, has been forgiven by me, thou also forgive me. p. maintained that the injurer ought to leave his old place and never to place his trust upon the injured just as the fragments of an earthen vessel cannot be reunited animosity destroys the very sons and grandsons, and thereby the parties lose the next world as well animosity can never die it lies hidden like fire in wood, or like the water fire in the ocean amongst men that have injured one another, therefore, mistrust alone can produce happiness nor should too much trust be placed upon a person deserving of trust one should try to inspire others with confidence in ones self, but never repose confidence in others the mind of a person who has once injured another becomes naturally filled with mistrust if he sees the injured person worshipping him with gifts and honours. hostility springs from five causes woman, land, words, natural incompatibility, and injury if time be the cause of all acts, why friends and kinsmen seek to avenge each other further, why did the gods and the asuras, in days of yore, smite each other in battle and what use would there be of medicines and how could religious merit be acquired by persons performing religious acts men wish for birds either for food or for sport. misery arises from various sources
brahmaguhaa . b, .
brahmakalpa1 . b, .
brahmakalpa2, adj .
brahmakaaya, pl a class of beings .
brahmakshetra . . g, .
brahmaloka1 . . j, . j, . b, sc. dhritaraashtrapage1 b raajadh.those who chastise the enemies of brahmans repair to b.kritaghnop.bhrigu bharadvaajas.am shrayateprajaapati, etc attained to b.mokshadh.samyagvritti, i.e. brahmacarya leads to b.shri vaasavas.nivaasibhi, sc. rishibhimokshadh.jivayukto ratho divyo be viraajatev. braahmanaacaaryo besha, nil. and the note of pcr.gataash caiva...maharshayashukakrityauparicarasashariro gatash caiva bm, sc. uparicaranaaraayaniyabn ca...golokan cab. is the lower lip of naaraayana, goloka the upperaanushaasanik.upamanyu brahmalokash ca lokaanaam ucyase, sc. shivaaanushaasanik.aavataaritai, sc. the names of shivagataa siddhaagataae vasanti, sc. gaavabisastainyop.aanushaasanik.yamasya sadane bsame gunaiordained for those who abstain from fleshmaitreyabhikshaaaanushaasanik.umaa maheshvaras.anugitaap.paraayanaanakulaakhyaanacaaraa
brahmaloka2, pl. .
brahmamedhyaa, a river .
brahmaan1, masc the creator . b, . j, . n, . u, . kk, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, bhuta sarga krito bnaavishvam srijat
brahmana shaastra .
brahmana kshaya. kk, . brahmakshetra.
brahmana pada . b, .
brahmana sadana . ff, . b, .
brahmana saras. gg, .
brahmana sthaana . b, . b, . c, . b, .
braahmana maahaatmya kathana. questioned by the paandavas about the greatness of the brahmans, maarkandeya told a prince of the haihayas killed a brahman, whom he took for a deer, as he was enveloped in the skin of a black antelope. the haihayas, very afflicted, set out inquiring as to whose son the muni might be. arriving at the hermitage of taarkshya arishtanemi, they told him the matter, and learnt that it was his son, and that he had been revived, because these munis had no fear of death, as they spoke well of brahmans, etc. . maarkandeya continued when the raajarshi vainya was per forming the horse sacrifice, atri desired to go and ask him for alms, but gave up his desire of wealth and proposed to his wife and sons that they should all retire to the woods. his wife prevailed upon him that he should first acquire riches and distribute them to his sons and servants, and so he went to vainya and praised him as the foremost of sovereigns and the ruler of their destinies . the rishi gautama blamed him for thus flattering the king, and said that it was indra who was the foremost of sovereigns and ruler of their destinies . the munis applied to sanatkumaara, who said that the brahmans and kshattriyas ought to act together, and that the king might rightly be styled as atri had e. vainya then gave to atri maidservants and millions of gold and ten bhaaras of gold. having given this to his sons atri retired to the forest .
brahmanas tirtha, a tirtha .
braahmana vyaadha samvaada, v. pativratopaakhyaana.
braahmani, a tirtha .
braahmani, a river .
brahmanirmitam saras .
brahmano has . b, .
brahmapura i.e. braahman, nil. raajeva syaam aham sukhiaanushaasanik.yathaa be ...shatakrator vajradharasya yajne
brahmaputra, pl. .
brahmarakshas, pl. . next.
brahmaraakshasa, mostly pl. . p, . b .
brahmarshi1, pl. . b, . u, . y, . cc, . d, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, .
brahmarshi2 . names of single brahmarshis arvaavasu, . ashtaavakra, . atri, . aurva, . bharadvaaja, . bhrigu, . cyavana, . shuka, . dadhica, . damana, . devasharman, . gautama, . jaajali, . kaashyapa, . kripa, . likhita, . lomasha, . mankanaka, . maarkandeya, . naarada, . pulastya, . ricika, . vaishampaayana, . vasishtha, . vishvaamitra, . vyaasa, .
. d vaishampaayana said in the midst of the ocean of milk there is a mountain of golden splenr, named vaijayanta, where brahmaan often used to sit thinking of adhyaatma once, in days of yore, his son shiva, who had sprung from his forehead, when proceeding along the sky saw him and dropped n before him, and was instructed by him about the many purushas created by him, and the one purusha, who transcends all purushas and is invisible, etc. . brahmaan discoursed on the indications of purusha .
brahmasabhaavarnana . in the krita age, aaditya having seen the sabhaa of pitaamaha, which is immeasurable and immaterial, told naarada, who also desired to see it, to perform a brahmavrata for, years. naarada, then, having repaired to himavat, performed the penance, and then he was taken by surya to the sabhaa of brahmaan. within a moment it assumes a different form, and cannot be described. it is neither cold nor warm, without hunger or thirst, etc. it is not supported by columns it is eternal, etc. there sarvalokapitaamaha is sitting, himself alone incessantly creating by means of his divine illusion, surrounded by the prajaanaam pataya, etc. .
brahmasadana . b, .
brahmasadas . b, .
brahmasaras, a tirtha . at b with holy peaks and resorted to by rishis, agastya had come to vaivasvata dharmaraaja himself had dwelt there there all the rivers take their rise and mahaadeva is always present there the paandavas per formed caaturmaasya sacrifices together with the great rishiyajna . there is the akshayavata, the imperishable sacrificial platform of the gods, where the merit acquired is imperishable. here they fasted with concentrated souls, and brahmans by hundred came and performed the caaturmaasya sacrifice and talked about various sacred subjects, and the learned and pious shamatha, who lived in celibacy, told them of gaya aamurtarayasa, . b, .
brahmasattra, name of a certain religious practice .
brahmasattrin . ff, .
brahmasthaana, a tirtha .
brahmaastra, a celestial weapon .
brahmasutaa. b, .
brahmasutra, a literary work .
brahma vashaatiya, pl v. vashaatiya.
brahmavadhyaa . b, .
brahmavaaluka, a tirtha .
brahmaavarta, a tirtha .
brahmavedhyaa, a river .
brahmavid3 vishnu .
brahmayoni1 . = pulastya, = sanatkumaara, = pracinabarhi, = purusha, = tandin, pl . do. fem. = menakaa, .
brahmayoni3. g, .
braahmya, adj. . g, . braahma.
brihadashva2, king of ayodhyaa .
brihadambaalikaa, a maatri. u, .
brihadbala1, an ancient king .
brihadbala2, son of subala, the gaandhaara king . acala.
brihadbala4, the kosala king . kausalya, kausalendra, kosalaka, kosalaanaam adhipati, kosslaanam bhartri, kosalaraaja.
brihaddyumna, a king .
brihadgarbha, son of shibi aushinara .
brihadguru, an ancient king .
brihadratha1, an ancient king .
brihadratha3, a maagadha king . b, . brihadratha1.
brihadratha4, a fire, . vaasishtha.
brihadratha6, a king slain by maandhaatri . b, .
brihaduktha, a fire .
brihadvati, a river . .
brihajjyotis, brihanmanas, brihanmantra .
brihanta1, a king .
brihanta2, the uluka king . the prec.
brihanta3. b mighty steeds of the aaratta breed bore b who alone rejecting the opinions of all the bharatas, had from his reverence for yudhishthira, gone over to him, abaning all his cherished wishes, .
brihanta4, a kuru warrior .
brihanta5, a paandava warrior .
brihaspati . bis, . b, . b, . c, . d, . b, . u, . w, . bb, . ff, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, angirasa vitahavyop.bharadvaajo jyeshtha putro beaanushaasanik.ushanaa veda yac chaastram yac ca veda biprabhritibhim ivaujasaa, i.e. vishvaamitraaanushaasanik.esh ca samvaadam indrasya cadevapurohitainstructed king maandhaatri about kinesuvarnotpattithe first of angiras eight sons, called vaarunasaanushaa sanik.praahaprabhritibhir brahmar shibhiavikshitsamo buddhyaa, i.e. avikshitsamvartta maruttiyason of angiras and brother of samvarttae samvaadam maruttasya caangirasa putram devaacaaryampurandarau er avaraja, i.e. samvarttaer anujam, i.e. samvarttagurushishyas.b. is the lord of the brahmansagastyaaashramavaasap.ivavidura surpassed b. in intelligenceputradarshanap.drona was born from a part of b.svargaarohanap.m viveshaatha drono hy angirasaam varam
brihat2, an asura .
brihat3, a saaman . o, .
brihatketu, an ancient king .
brihatkirti, son of angiras .
brihatkshattra1, a kaikeya prince . kaikeya.
brihatsena, a king .
brihatsenaa, the nurse of damayanti .
brimhitaa, a maatri .
budbudaa, an apsaras .
buddhikaamaa, a maatri. u, .
budha, the planet mercury . b, . e, . b, krishna vaasudevamarried to ilaa and father of pururavasaanushaasanik.
cashaati, pl a people, .
caitraratha1 . b, .
caitraratha parvan .
caitrarathaparvan . within a few days there came a brahman to the abode of their host, whom they asked to narrate the birth of dhrishtadyumna from the sacrificial fire, and that of krishnaa from the centre of the vedi, and that of shikhandin, and how dhrishtadyumna learnt the use of all weapons from drona, and how the friendship of drona and drupada was broken . the brahman related the birth of drona, his friendship with drupada, and his visit to raama, the breaking of his friendship with drupada, how bhishma prevailed upon him to teach the princes, etc and the chastisement of drupada . draupadi sambhava . hearing the words of the brahman, the sons of kunti seemed to be, as it were, pierced with darts. kunti proposed to yudhishthira that they should go to the paancaalas, a country they had not seen before, and he consented for his part. when the other brothers had likewise consented, they set out for the town of drupada . when they were living disguised, vyaasa came and told them that formerly the daughter of a rishi, notwith standing her beauty, obtained no husband, and therefore by austerities propitiated shankara five times, saying give me a husband. accordingly the god said that she should in a future life have five husbands. that damsel is krishnaa, appointed to be the wife of ye all go therefore to the capital of the paancaalas and dwell ye there. he then left them . after vyaasa had gone away, the paandavas proceeded in a northerly direction, walking day and night till they reached the tirtha somaashrayaayana . then they arrived at the gangaa dhananjaya walked before them, torch in hand. the gandharva king with his wives was then sporting there in the gengaa. bending his bow to a circle, he said, excepting the first lavas, the muhurta that begins with the twilight preceding nightfall has been appointed for the yakshas, gandharvas, and raakshasas, capable of going everywhere at will the rest has been appointed for man to his work. if therefore men, wandering during those moments from greed of gain, come near us, both we and the raakshasas slay those fools. therefore persons acquainted with the vedas never applaud those men, who then approach any piece of water. stay ye at a distance. know that am angaaraparna, the friend of kubera, and this my forest is also called angaaraparna, where neither kaunapas, nor shringins, nor gods, nor men can come. arjuna replied whether it be night, or twilight, who can bar others from the ocean, the himaalaya, and gangaa . arjuna burnt the gandharvas chariot with the aagneya weapon, given by brihaspati to bharadvaaja, by him to agniveshya, by him to drona, by drona to arjuna, and dragged him, who had become unconscious, by the hair. his wife kumbhinasi prevailed upon yudhishthira, and he commanded arjuna to spare him. he declared that, instead of his former name, citraratha, he should now be called dagdharatha, and imparted to arjuna the gaandharvi vidyaa called caakshushi . he also gave arjuna and each of his brothers one hundred horses born in the country of the gandharvas, endued with the speed of wind and employed in carrying the gods and gandharvas, a portion of indras vajra . arjuna in return gave him the aagneya weapon, and asked him why they, though skilled in the vedas, had been censured by him. he replied that it was because they were without fires, without sacriflces, and without a brahman walking before them. the yakskas, raakshasas, gandharvas, pishaacas, uragas, and daanavas know the history of the kuru race have heard from naarada and other devarshis the deeds of your ancestors. have been vanquished by thee in battle on account of the brahmacarya being rigidly observed a kshattriya, who is addicted to lust, if he fights in the night, can never escape with life but even if addicted to lust, he who has a purohita may vanquish all wanderers of the night. therefore, o taapatya kings should always select a fit purohita . citraratha related tapatyupaakhyaana . vaasishtha . aurvopaakhyaana . vasishtopaakhyaana . dhaumya purohitakarana .
caitraseni1, a prince .
caitraseni2, patron. .
caitri, the day of full moon in the month of caitra .
caitya, a mountain near girivraja, the following .
cakra1, a serpent .
cakra2, companions of skanda. u
cakra3, the discus of krishna .
cakra4, pl a people .
cakracara, pl a sort of rishi . b, .
cakradeva, a vrishni warrior .
cakradhanus, a rishi .
cakradhara, adj .
cakradharman, the chief of the vidyaadharas .
cakradvaara, a mountain and its genius. b, .
cakraka, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
cakramanda, a serpent .
cakranemi, a maatri. u, .
cakraati, pl a people .
cakravaaka, pl a sort of goose, anas casarca, gm .
cakravyuha, a kind of array. g, .
cakshurvardhanikaa, a river in shaakadvipa. b, .
caakshusha1, a manu .
caakshusha2, adj. . b, caakshusham janma dvitiyam brahmana
caakshushaa, a gandharvic science given to arjuna by citraratha . b c. had been communicated by manu to soma, by soma to vishvaavasu, and by vishvaavasu to citraratha after ascetic penances, and when communicated by the preceptor to a man without energy, it becomes fruitless. by means of it one may see whatever one wishes. one can acquire it only by standing on one leg for six months but arjuna obtained it without any rigid vow. this knowledge makes the gandharvas superior to men and equal to the gods.
camasa, a tirtha .
camasodbheda, a tirtha . c, .
camasodbhedana, a tirtha .
campaa, the metropolis of the angas . b, . maalini.
campakaaranya, a wood .
caampeya, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
camuhara, a vishvedeva .
candabala, a monkey .
candabhaargava, a brahman .
candakaushika, a muni, son of kaakshivat .
candaala1, name of a caste . b, .
candaala2, sg. = matanga, .
caandaala1 . g, . b, .
caandaala2, sg. = parigha, foll.
caandaalikaashrama, a tirtha. by repairing to c. and bathing in kokaamukha, after having subsisted upon potherbs and having worn ragged clothes, one is sure to obtain ten maidens, .
candatundaka, a suparna, son of garuda .
candra2, v. soma.
candra3, an asura . candramas.
candrabha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
candrabhaagaa, a river, the present chenaab . b bathing for seven days in the c. or the vitastaa, one is sure to become purified from all sins and endued with the merits of an ascetic, . b, .
candrashilaa, a maatri. u, .
candraashva, son of kuvalaashva .
candradeva1, a kuru warrior .
candradeva2, a paancaala prince .
candrahantri, an asura .
candraka, an owl. b, .
candraketu, a kuru warrior .
candramaa, a river in bhaaratavarsha .
candramas1, v. soma.
candramas2, an asura . candra.
candramasas tirtha, a tirtha. b, .
caandramasi, the wife of brihaspati .
candrapramardana, an asura .
candrasena1, a prince, son of samudrasena .
candrasena2, a kuru warrior .
candrasya vinaashana, an asura .
candravatsa, pl a people .
candrodaya, a paandava warrior .
canura1, a prince .
capala, an ancient king .
caarana, pl a class of beings . b, . h, . i, . b, . b, . g, . b, . . b, .
carmakaara, a caste, .
carmamandala, pl a people .
carmanvati, a river, now chambal . b, .
carmavat, brother of shakuni .
caarucitra, son of dhritaraashtra . caarucitraangada.
caarucitraangada, son of dhritaraashtra . caarucitra.
caarushirsha, a muni .
caarushravas, son of krishna and rukmini. .
caarudeshna, son of krishna and rukmini . .
caarunetraa, an apsaras .
caaruvaktra, a warrior of skanda. u, .
caaruvesha, son of krishna and rukmini .
caaruyashas, son of krishna and rukmini .
caarvaaka, a raakshasa, friend of duryodhana .
caasaavaktra, a warrior of skanda. u, .
caturashva, an ancient king .
caturdamshtra1, a warrior of skanda. u, .
caturveda1, pl a sort of pitris .
caaturvidya, n .
catushkarni, a maatri. u, .
catushpathaniketaa, a maatri. u, .
catushpatharataa, a maatri. u, .
catvaravaasini, a maatri. u, .
caura, pl a people .
cedi, pl a people . d, i.e. dhrishtaketu, came with one akshauhini of troops to yudhishthirasanjayayaanap.karushakaa...bhumipaalaa, took the part of the paandavasyaanasandhip.among the allies of yudhishthirapaan caalai, bhagavadyaanap.sahajash c matsyaanaampaancaala kaikayaa paancaalaaambopaakhyaanap.kaashi karushaanaam netaaraam...dhrishtaketum dhrishtaketush ca cinaam pranetaajambukh.matsya karushaash ca, in bhaaratavarshabhishmavadhap.kaashi karusheshu matsyeshu matsya karushaakaashi karushaipaancaala karusha matsyaakaashi karushaanaamkaashi karushaanaammatsya paancaala cinaamdronaabhish.kaarushai, attack dronaeko pasritya cbhya paandavaan ya samaashrita dhrishtaketumsamshaptakavadhap.kaarusha koshalaa, attack drona kekayaandhrishtaketum cinaam rishabhamayash caaparepaancaala paandunaampratijnaap.jayadrathavadhap.dhrishtaketush ca cinaam rishabhapaancaala srinjayaandhrishta ketush ca cinaam rishabha paancaala srinjayaapaancaala srinjayaanghatotkacavadhap.kaarusha koshalaapaancaala somakaadronavadhap. kaikeya srinjayaan matsyeshunaaraayanaa stramokshap.yuvaraajash ca cinaamprabhum yuvaraajam, = slain by ashvatthaamankarnap.dhrishta ketu...cinaam pravaro rathapaancaala kaikayaa kaarusha matsyaanaamamong those who know the eternal religionpaancaala cinaam kaikeya paancaalaapaandava paanshaalaapaancaalyam c kaikeyasamvritam, i.e. dhrishtadyumna inaan ca mahaarathaan kaikeya paancaaleshu paancaala paandavaan kaashi paancaalaanpaancaala kaikayaanpaancaalaanshalyap.have been slainanugitaap.purim ramyaam cinaam shuktisaahvayaam, i.e. shuktimatiinaam ishvara, i.e. vasuputradarshanap.no longer exist
cekitaana1, a vrishni . saattvata, vaarshneya.
cetasaka, pl v. vetasaka.
chaneva. b, .
chatravati, a city . ahicchattra.
. b bhishma said in ancient times jamadagni bhaargava was practising with his bow renukaa used to pick up the arrows and bring them back to him. one at noontide, when the sun was in jyeshthaamula, renukaa, her head and feet being scorched by the heat of the sun, rested for a moment under a tree, whereafter jamadagni threatened to shoot the sun. the sun, in the guise of a brahman, approached him and reminded him that the sun produces food, etc. . questioned by yudhishthira, bhishma said as jamadagni did not desist from his anger, the brahman reminded him that the sun is always in motion and cannot therefore be pierced jamadagni, knowing surya, said that the sun stays at midday for a moment. then surya sought his protection, and jamadagni comforted him, saying he who would slay one who asks for protection would transcend the simplicity that exists in brahmans, etc. . surya presented him with an umbrella and a pair of sandals, saying, from this day the gift of these articles in all religious rites shall be established as an indispensable usage. .
cicchila, pl a people .
cikura, a serpent, father of the serpent sumukha .
cina, pl a people .
cintyadyotaa, a gana of gods .
cirakaari, cirakaarika, cirakaarin, son of gautama .
ciraantaka, a suparna, son of garuda .
ciravaasas1, a king .
ciravaasas2, a yaksha .
cirini, a river .
citra1, son of dhritaraashtra .
citra2, a serpent .
citra3, a paandava warrior .
citra4, brother of citrasena, the abhisaara king .
citra5, a paancaala warrior .
citraa, a nakshatra .
citrabaahu, son of dhritaraashtra .
citrabarha, a suparna, son of garuda .
citrabarhin, son of garuda. u, .
citracaapa, son of dhritaraashtra .
citrashilaa, a river .
citradeva, a warrior of skanda. u, .
citradharman, a prince .
citraka1, son of dhritaraashtra .
citraka2, pl a people .
citraketu1, a suparna, son of garuda .
citraketu2, a paandava warrior .
citraaksha, son of dhritarashtra .
citrakundala, son of dhritaraashtra .
citrakuta, a mountain . m if one observing a fast bathes at c. and janasthaana, and in the water of mandaakini, he is sure to obtain royal prosperity, .
citralekhaa, an apsaras .
citraanga, son of dhritaraashtra .
citraangada1, son of shaantanu and satyavati .
citraangada2, a prince .
citraangada3, a kuru warrior .
citraangada4, a kalinga king .
citraangada5, a dashaarna king .
citraangadaa, daughter of citravaahana and mother of babhru vaahana in the encounter between arjuna and babhruvaahana both fell n in a swoon. babhruvaahana regained consciousness and c. prevailed upon ulupi to revive arjuna . caitravaahani.
citraangadaa, an apsaras. b, .
citraangadaatmaja, = babhruvaahana, .
citraangaaakhyaana, episode relating to cit raangada . two sons were born of satyavati, citraangada and vicitravirya. before the last had attained to majority, shaantanu died and ascended to heaven, bhishma placed citraangada on the throne. citraangada considered nobody his equal, not even the gods and asuras. therefore the king of the gandharvas bearing the same name fought a three years battle with him at kurukshetra on the banks of the sarasvati, where citraangada was slain then the gandharva ascended to heaven. bhishma installed vicitravirya, yet in his minority, on the throne of the kurus and ruled for him.
citraratha1, king of the gandharvas . h, . angaaraparna, dagdharatha, gandharva, gandharvaraaja.
citraratha2, king of mrittikaavati .
citraratha3, brother of the paancaala prince viraketu .
citraratha4, an anga king. b, . angapati, angeshvara, angendra.
citraratha5, the great grandfather of krishna. b, .
citrarathaa, a river .
citrasaini, v. caitraseni.
citrasena1, son of dhritaraashtra .
citrasena2, son of the elder parikshit .
citrasena3, a gandharva . b, . gandharva, gandharvaraaj, gandharvaraaja, gandharvaraajan.
citrasena4, the general of king jaraasandha .
citrasena5, a prince .
citrasena6, king of the abhisaaras, brother of citra .
citrasena7, a paancaala warrior .
citrasena8, brother of karna .
citrasena9, a serpent .
citrasena1, son of karna .
citrasena1, various kuru warriors .
citrasenaa, an apsaras .
citrasenaa, a river .
citrasenaa, a maatri. u, .
citravahaa, a river .
citravaahana, king of manipura .
citravaana, son of dhritaraashtra . citrabaahu.
citravarman1, son of dhritaraashtra .
citravarman2, a prince .
citravarman3, brother of viraketu .
citravarman4, son of sucitra .
citravegika, a serpent .
citraayudha1, son of dhritaraashtra .
citraayudha2, a prince .
citraayudha3, one or more princes who sided with the paandavas .
citraayudha4, a kuru warrior .
citropalaa, a river .
civuka, pl a barbarous people .
cola1, pl a people in the present tanjore .
cola2, king of the colas .
cucuka, pl a people .
cucuka, v. cucuka.
cucupa, v. cucupa.
cucupa, pl a people .
culakaa, v. culukaa.
culika, v. cucupa.
culukaa, a river .
cyavana1, a rishi, son of bhrigu . b, unchavrittyup.bhaargavamvishvaamitrop.syaatma sambhava ricika iti vikhyaatasyaatmaja, i.e. ricikaaanushaasanik.nahushasya ca samvaadam maharshesh csya cacyavanop.maharshish co bhaargavabhrigunandanambhrigo putrambhrigudvaac. having been caught in the net of some fishers, the price of him is settled to be a cowsya samvaadam kushikasya cacyavana kushikasamv.bhaargavabhrigunandanabrahmarshec. will destroy the race of kushika, but is gratified by him, and promises that vishvaamitra, a descendant of kushika, will become a brahmansuvarnotpattithe first of the seven sons of bhriguaanushaasanik.attained to heaven by fastpavanaarjunasamv. kapa, pl.took away the earth from the godsaanushaasanik.bhaargava, among the rishis of the northsam vartta maruttiyacf.
the discourse between cyavana and kushika. c bhishma said cyavana bhaargava saw the stain that would affect his own race and desired to consume the race of the kushikas he came and said to king kushika that he desired to dwell with him for some time. kushika and his wife welcomed and honoured him according to his desire, they promised to serve him, while he observed a vow. once he slept for twenty one days, while kushika and the queen kept themselves awake, foregoing all food then cyavana went out, followed by the king and the queen, and disappeared the king with the queen sorrowfully returned to the palace, where he found cyavana stretched as before on his bed, and sat by his side, while he slept for twenty one days then cyavana ordered them to rub him, and then entered the bathing house, and once more disappeared by means of his yoga power. the next time, c. was seen on the throne then he ordered food, but reduced it all to ashes, and disappeared. kushika with his queen stood there in the same posture the whole night without speaking a word, without giving way to wrath. so it went on every day. cyavana failed to notice any fault in the conduct of the king. then he ordered them to yoke themselves to a chariot and pull him along it should be the kings battle chariot with every weapon, etc and the goad they must drag him slowly in the sight of the people, who lamented suddenly he struck them with the goad, so that they were covered with blood no food had passed their lips for fifty nights on his way he began to give away very largely of the kings property. then cyavana, delighted, came n from the chariot, unharnessed the royal couple, and granted them a boon he softly touched them with his hands, the healing virtues of which were like ambrosia, and all their fatigue, etc was dispelled, and they once more became endued with youth. he dismissed them till the next himself remaining on the banks of the gangaa. meanwhile cyavana, by his yoga power, converted that delightful wood on the bank of the gangaa into a retreat full of wealth of every kind and jewels and gems . the next morning kushika came with his wife, and saw that palace made entirely of gold, etc and aps. and g and thought that it was the country of the uttara kurus or indras abode amaraavati. cyavana lay stretched on a costly and excellent bed, and at the same time on a mat of kusha grass. in a moment everything disappeared, aps g etc. cyavana praised kushika and his queen kushika said that he had a sufficient boon, not having been consumed by the fire of cyavanas penances he asked him to expound some bts . asked by kushika, cyavana explained the reason of his conduct in days past, when the gods had assembled together, he had heard brahmaan say that, owing to a contention between brahman and kshattriya energy, there would occur an intermixture in his race therefore he had resolved to exterminate the kushikas, but had failed to find any fault with kushika seeing the delightful palace he had created, kushika had had a foretaste of heaven and had become desirous of the status of a brahman and the merit of penances the person who will be the third in descent from thee shall attain to the status of a brahman through the energy of the bhrigus, thy grandson will be an ascetic endued with the splenr of fire shall set out on a tirthayaatraa. kushika asked in what way the status of brahmanhood would attach to his race . cyavana foretold that the kshattriyas would exterminate the bhaargavas, except urva, who would cast the fire of his wrath into the mares mouth in the ocean he would have a son ricika, to whom dhanurveda in its incarnate form would come in order to exterminate all kshattriyas he would communicate it to his son jamadagni kushika gaadhi urva vishvaamitra ricika jamadagni raama kushika became filled with joy cyavana set out on his tirtha yaatraa everything fell out as cyavana had said .
the episode relating to cyavana. b bhishma said in days past m. ri. cyavana bhaargava set himself for twelve years to udavaasa at the confluence of the gangaa and yamunaa, and stood there like a wooden post . he was caught in the net of some fishers along with a large number of fish, etc. they were afraid cyavana said that he would either die with the fishes or be sold with them. with pale faces the fishers repaired to king nahusha, who immediately went to cyavana with his ministers and priest cyavana asked him to pay the price for himself and the fishes nahusha ordered large sums to be paid to the nishaadas for cyavana but the latter declared that these could not represent his price, even his whole king nahusha deliberated with his ministers and priests then there came an ascetic living in the woods, born of a cow, and said that the cow was equal in value to the brahman this cyavana approved of, as svaahaa and vashat kaara are always established upon kine, etc. cyavana accepted the cow from the fisher men, and caused them along with the fishes to proceed to heaven. the two ri. gladdened king nahusha by granting him many boons he accepted the boon that he should himself remain firm in virtue. the two ri. returned each to his own asylum, and nahusha to his city . asked by yudhishthira about raama jaamadagnya, etc bhishma recited an old history of the discourse between cyavana and kushika, i.e. cyavana kushika samvaada .
shabala, a serpent .
shabalaashva, a prince .
shabalaaksha, a rishi .
shabara, pl a barbarous people . n, . b, . b, . g, . c, .
shaci, the queen of indra, daughter of puloman and mother of jayanta . c, . u, . b, umaa maheshvarasamv.kaushikasya ci satiyathaa ...shacishakrasya mahishim priyaamshacyaajayantam iva paulomimaghavaan iva pyaamahendra iva pyaa
shaashabindava1, pl . do adj .
shashabindu1, an ancient king, son of citraratha bis king sh. was invincible, etc per formed diverse sacrifices, and had, wives, who bore each, sons of great prowess, who performed millions of sacrifices . sh. gave away all those sens to the brahmans, each with hundreds upon hundreds of chariots, etc. upon the completion of his horse sacrifice mountains of food and drink remained. at last he ascended to heaven. b, .
shashabindu3, pl descendants of shashabindu . b, .
shashaada, an ancient king of ayodhyaa .
shashaka, pl a people .
shashaloman, an ancient king .
shashayaana, a tirtha. .
shashika, pl a people .
shasholukamukhi, a maatri. u, .
shaibaala, pl v. shaivala, pl.
shaibya1, an ancient king .
shaibya2, govaasana .
shaibya3, one of krishnas horses .
shaibya4, a vrishni prince .
shaibya5, a prince slain by krishna. b, .
shaibya7, king of the shibis, various princes at the time of yudhishthira . possibly identical with or .
shaibya1, v. shaivya.
shaibyaa, wife of sagara .
shaibyaa, wife of dyumatsena .
shaibyaa, wife of krishna .
shaibyaa, a river .
shaishava, pl a people .
shaishira, a mountain .
shaishupaala, v. shaishupaali.
shaikhaavatya, a brahman .
shaila2, a celestial weapon .
shailaabha, a vishvedeva .
shailakampin, a warrior of skanda. u, .
shailaalaya, an ancient king, grandfather of bhagadatta .
shailodaa, a river .
shailusha, a gandharva .
shaineya2, pl descendants of shini .
shairishaka, name of a place .
shaivala, pl a people .
shaivya2, shaivyaa, shaivyaatmaja .
shaka, pl a people . b, .
shaaka, a tree in shaakadvipa. b, .
shaakadvipa, a dvipa named after the shaaka tree . b sh. is of twice the extent of jambudvipa, and the ocean also is of twice the extent of that island. sh. is surrounded on all sides by the ocean. the kings there are full of righteousness, and the men never die there is no famine the people are all full of forbearance and great energy. there are seven mountains decked with jewels, etc and many rivers. the mountains are meru, the abode of ri and g. malaya, to the east there the clouds are generated, and thence they disperse on all sides jaladhaara, whence indra daily takes water, and from that we get showers of rain raivataka, over which the constellation revati is placed by brahmaan himself on the north of this is shyaama. because the hue of these mountains is dark, the people residing there are all dark in complexion durga shaila kesharin . the measure of each of these mountains is ble that of the one mentioned immediately before. there are seven varshas one for each mountain. in the midst is a large tree called shaaka, in height and breadth equal to the jambu tree in jambudvipa, and it is always aed by the people. there are many delightful provinces where shiva is worshipped, and thither repair si and caa. the people are virtuous, and all the four orders are devoted to their respective occupations. there is no instance of theft. they are free from decrepitude and death, and gifted with long life. the rivers are full of sacred water whence indra draws water to shower it as rain. gangaa herself is among them. they are all sin cleansing. there are four sacred provinces . there is no king and no punishment, and no person that deserves to be punished, .
shaakala1, a city, the capital of the madras .
shaakala2, pl the inhabitants of shaakala .
shaakala dvipa, a country . next.
shaakalya, a rishi .
shaakambhari, a tirtha, named after sh. = durgaa .
shaakavaktra, a warrior of skanda. u, .
shaakha, a son or form of skanda. b, . u, .
shaakra, belonging to indra .
shakrabhavana, the abode of indra .
shakradeva, son of the kalinga king .
shakraloka, the world of indra . f, . b, . b, . k, . b, .
the discourse between indra and namuci. b when the asura namuci, who was conversant with the birth and death of all creatures, was sitting, divested of prosperity but un troubled at heart, bound with cords, brought under the sway of his foes, etc indra asked him if he grieved or passed his days cheerfully. namuci answers that he s not grieve, and explains why, citing gautama .
shakra sabhaa varnana, description of the palace of indra. the sabhaa of shakra is built by shakra himself, yojanas in breadth, yojanas in length, yojanas in height, capable of going everywhere at will, named pushkaramaalini. there indra sits with shaci, shri, and lakshmi, the maruts, the siddhas, the devarshis, the saadhyas, the devaganas. enumeration of devarshis and celestial beings .
shakrasya tirtha, the tirtha of indra .
shakravaapin, a serpent .
shakraavarta, a tirtha .
shakta1, a prince .
shaakta, shaakte putra, shakteya, v. shaktr.
shakti1, probably a more correct reading instead of shaktri .
shaktija, v. shaktrija.
shaktimat, v. shuktimat.
shaktiputra, v. shaktriputra.
shaktri, a rishi, son of vasishtha and father of paraashara . b, . vaasishtha.
the episode about the shakula fishes. b in a lake that was not very deep and which abounded in fishes, there lived three shakula fishes that were friends amongst those three, one had much fore thought another was possessed of great presence of mind the third was pro crastinating . one day certain fishermen coming to that lake began to bale out its waters to a lower ground through diverse outlets. he of great forethought, having in vain warned the others, immediately set out through a current and reached another deep lake. the procrastinating one was caught with many others and tied to a string. he of presence of mind thrust himself into the company of those so tied, and remained quietly among them biting the string, and escaped when the fishes were removed to a piece of deep water to be washed. the procrastinating one met with his death .
shakuna, pl a people .
shakuni1, son of the gaandhaara king subala and brother in law of dhritaraashtra อด, อด, อด, อด, อด, . also the following synonyms gaandhaara, q.v. gaandhaarapati, q.v. gaandhaararaaja, q.v. gaandhaararaajaputra, gaandhaararaajasya putra, gaandhaararaajasya suta, q.v. kitava, q.v. paarvatiya, . saubala, . saubalaka, . saubaleya, . subalaja, . subalaputra, . subalasya putra, . subalasya suta, . subalaatmaja, .
shakuni2, a serpent .
shakuni3, a demon .
shakunikaa, a maatri. u, .
shakuniputra, the son of shakuni, king of the gaandhaaras .
shakunta, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
shakuntalaa, daughter of vishvaamitra and menakaa, wife of dushyanta, and mother of bharata .
shakuntalopaakhyaana, episode relating to shakun talaa dushyanta saw shakuntalaa, daughter of vishvaamitra and menakaa. enumeration of the eight forms of marriage according to manu. dushyanta, during the absence of kanva, wedded shakuntalaa according to the gaandharva form, promising her that her son should be the heir apparent, and departing told her that he should send troops to take her to his capital. kanva, by his spiritual knowledge, knew what she had e, and approved of it, and bestowed on her the boon that the paurava monarchs might ever be virtuous and never be deprived of their thrones . shakuntalaa, after three years, brought forth a beautiful boy, for whom kanva caused all the religious rites to be performed, and who, when he was only years of age, used to seize and bind to the trees lions, etc wherefore he was called sarvadamana. then kanva caused his disciples to bring shakuntalaa and the boy to haastinapura and introduce them to dushyanta. then they returned to the hermitage. dushyanta feigned not to remember anything. then shakuntalaa became angry . then she left his presence. but a voice from the sky commanded dushyanta to cherish his son, who should therefore be called bharata. it was this voice of the devaduta that dushyanta had waited for, that the people should not regard his son as of impure birth. bharata reduced to subjection all the kings of the earth and became a saarvabhauma cakravartin, and performed many sacrifices with kanva as the chief priest. from him has come the bharata race, of whom the principal ones shall be mentioned .
shala1, a serpent .
shala2, son of dhritaraashtra .
shala3, son of somadatta and brother of bhuri and bhurishravas .
shala4, son of king parikshit of ayodhyaa and the daughter of the frog king .
shalabha1, an asura .
shalabha2, a paandava warrior .
shalabha, pl. .
shalabhi, a maatri. u, .
shalahara, a serpent .
shaalishiras, a devagandharva .
shaalihotra, a rishi .
shaalihotrasya tirtha, a tirtha .
shaalipinda, a serpent .
shaalisurya, a tirtha .
shaalmali1, son of avikshit .
shaalmali2, one of the seven dvipas .
shalu, a river .
shaalukini, a tirtha .
shaalva1, pl. .
shaalva2, pl a people .
shaalva3, name of one or more different princes . some of these quotations may perhaps refer to shaalva4 .
shaalva4, lord of saubha . shaalvapati, shaalvaraaja, saubhapati, saubharaaj, and the next.
shaalva5, lord of saubha, a daitya slain by krishna. b, . daiteyaapasada, maarttikaavataka nripa, saubha, saubhaadhipati, saubhapati, saubharaaj.
shaalvaka1, adj. .
shaalvaka2, pl. .
shaalvaputra, a prince .
shaalvaseni, pl a people .
shaalvaayana, adj. .
shaalveya, pl a people . shaalva, pl and the next.
shaalveyaka, pl a people .
shalya, king of the madras, brother of maadri, the wife of paandu, and father of rukmaratha อด, . also the following synonyms aartaayani, . baalhikapungava, q.v. madraadhipa, . madraadhipati, . madraja, . madrajanaadhipa, . madrajaneshvara, . madraka, . madrakaadhama, . madrakaadhipa, . madrakeshvara, . madraanaam adhipa, . madraanaam ishvara, . madraanaam rishabha, . madraanaam vrishabha, . madrapa, . madrapati, . madraraaj, . madraraaja, . madraraajan, . madraraajeshvaraatmaja, . madresha, . madreshvara, . sauvira, q.v.
shalyaanuja . madraraajaanuja.
shalyaparvan1, the of the greater parvans of mhbhr . c, .
shalyaparvan2, the of the minor parvans of mhbhr . requested by janame jaya, vaishampaayana related duryodhanas grief at karnas slaughter, his resolution to continue the battle, his making shalya the commander of the army that shalya, having made a great carnage, was slain by yudhishthira at midnight that duryodhana fled away from the field, penetrated into a lake, and in the afternoon was summoned and slain by bhimasena, who had caused the lake to be encompassed by many warriors that ashvatthaaman, etc slaughtered the paancaala troops in the night that sanjaya, next morning, having set out from the camp, entered the city the grief of the citizens upon hearing duryodhanas fall that sanjaya informed dhrita raashtra dhritaraashtras, etc grief that dhritaraashtra ordered vidura to let the ladies and gaandhaari retire, and was comforted by vidura dhritaraashtras lament and how he asked sanjaya about the battle . sanjaya begins his narration. the fear of the kurus after the fall of karna, and the state of the kuru army duryodhanas resolution to resist the victors bhima and dhrishtadyumna caused a great carnage arjuna proceeded towards the car division nakula, etc shakuni, foot soldiers arjuna they were slain by dhrishtadyumna and bhima the kuru army broke and fled away cekitaana, etc having slain a large number, blew their conchs arjuna attacked the rest they fled duryodhana the paandavas duryo dhana rallied his troops duryodhana the paandavas . kripa urged duryodhana to make peace duryodhana refused . the troops were filled with enthusiasm they took up their quarters about two yojanas distant, and bathed in the sarasvati of red waters on the sacred and beautiful tableland at the foot of himavat there they passed the night shalya, etc and urged yudhishthira to continue the battle. duryodhana addressed ashvatthaaman, according to whose proposal shalya was made genera lissimo shalya promised to slay the foes . shalya was anointed the troops became cheerful . shalya resolved to slay or be slain . no one any longer felt any grief on account of karna they slept that night happily and became very cheerful. yudhishthira asked krishna his advice krishna praised shalya, saying that he was equal to bhishma, etc and superior to shikhandin, etc. he thought only yudhishthira was a match for shalya, and urged him to slay him. after krishna had gone, yudhishthira dismissed all his brothers and the somakas and slept happily that night, and so did the paancaalas and the paandavas, delighted with karnas fall . the battle of the forenoon of the eighteenth day. after that night had passed away, the kuru army, urged by duryodhana, prepared for battle the leaders, kripa, etc resolved to fight unitedly . then, with shalya at their head, they quickly proceeded against the foes. similarly, the paandavas. asked by dhritaraashtra about shalyas slaughter by yudhishthira and duryodhanas by bhimasena, sanjaya related shalya proceeded with horses of the sindhu breed yoked unto his chariot, at the head of the array, accom panied by the madrakas and the sons of karna enumeration of warriors on the left, on the right, in the rear, in the centre shakuni and uluka surrounded by a large force of cavalry, etc. the mighty bowmen amongst the paandavas divided themselves into three bodies, and rushed against the kurus dhrishtadyumna, etc against the army of shalya yudhishthira with his troops against shalya alone arjuna against kritavarman and the samshaptakas bhimasena, etc against kripa nakula and sahadeva against shakuni and uluka. requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya enumerated the relative strength of the two armies . the commencement of the battle a terrible slaughter on both sides. arjuna and bhimasena stupefied their foes dhrishtadyumna, etc shalya nakula and sahadeva proceeded with speed the kurus fled away . shalya yudhishthira nakula karnas son citrasena, whom he slew nakula citrasenas brothers satyasena and sushena nakula slew satyasena, mounted the chariot of sutasoma, and slew sushena. the kurus were rallied by shalya a great slaughter took place on both sides. saatyaki, etc roared like lions, etc. the kurus surrounded shalya thither came arjuna, having slaughtered the samshaptakas, and the paandavas headed by dhrishtadyumna . shalya fought with great heroism against the troops of yudhishthira portents appeared on earth and in the skies. shalya yudhishthira, etc. many were slain the paandava army repaired to yudhishthira kritavarman, etc bhimasena, etc. kritavarman bhimasena kripa dhrishtadyumna shakuni the draupa deyas ashvatthaaman the twins duryodhana krishna and arjuna the bhoja chief slew the brown steeds of bhimasena shalya slew the steeds of sahadeva, who then slew shalyas son kripa dhrishtadyumna ashvatthaaman the draupadeyas once more the steeds of bhimasena were slain he crushed the steeds and chariot of kritavarman, who fled away shalya yudhishthira, etc. bhima shalya save shalya or raama, none else can venture to encounter bhima save bhima, none can venture to encounter shalya kripa taking up shalya on his own chariot, bore him away bhima had also been made senseless. the kurus the paandavas duryodhana cekitaana kripa, etc yudhishthira duryodhana dhrishtadyumna ashvatthaaman arjuna shalya candrasena drumasena yudhishthira cedis, etc. yudhishthira was worsted . saatyaki and bhimasena, etc. shalya si etc were delighted duryodhana regarded the paandavas, paancaalas, and srinjayas as already slain the paandavas shalya, who agitated the whole paandava army . and g. wondered the paandavas with bhimasena at their head and led by yudhishthira did not fly . arjuna ashvatthaaman and the trigartas arjuna destroyed, chariots ashvatthaaman the paancaala suratha, whom he slew ashvatthaaman and the samshaptakas arjuna . duryodhana dhrishtadyumna shikhandin the prabhadrakas kritavarman and kripa shalya the paandavas nakula yudhishthira shalya yudhishthira, etc shalya shalya bhimasena saatyaki saatyaki shalya . the paandavas were afflicted by the kurus . arjuna kripa and kritavarman sahadeva shakuni nakula cast glances on shalya from the side the draupadeyas checked numerous kings shikhandin ashvatthaaman bhimasena duryodhana yudhishthira shalya shalya alone fought with the whole paandava army shalya bhima the paandavas fled, disregarding the cries of yudhishthira, who, summoning all his brothers and krishna, declared that after bhishma, etc had been slain, shalya only remained as his share the sons of maadri should be the protectors of his wheels saatyaki would protect his right wheel and dhrishtadyumna his left, arjuna his rear, bhima fight in his front. the paandava troops rejoiced, especially the paancaalas, etc. yudhishthira shalya bhima duryodhana dhrishtadyumna, etc shakuni, etc. duryodhana was borne away by his steeds ashvatthaaman, etc followed him in order to rescue him the kaurava troops became terrified arjuna began to slay them shalya was worsted by yudhishthira the army of duryodhana broke ashvatthaaman, taking shalya up on his own chariot, fled away shalya yudhishthira saatyaki, etc. the paandavas, etc shalya the kurus surrounded shalya at the command of duryodhana kripa slew yudhishthiras charioteer, and shalya his steeds bhimasena slew shalyas charioteer and steeds and cut off his armour dhrishtadyumna, etc shalya yudhishthira slew shalya with a celestial dart . shalyas younger brother yudhishthira, who slew him the kurus broke saatyaki kritavarman, whom kripa carried away on his chariot duryodhana alone withstood the paandava leaders kritavarman kripa yudhishthira kritavarman was carried away by ashvatthaaman upon the latters chariot kripa yudhishthira. the paarthas blew their conchs and applauded yudhishthira . the followers of shalya resolved to avenge him duryodhana commanded them not to proceed to battle they, however, attacked yudhishthira arjuna, etc the madrakas, whom they began to slaughter duryodhana in vain tried to prevent them from fighting then, urged by shakuni, he proceeded to the rescue of the madrakas. the paandavas arranged themselves in the form called madhyama and slew the madrakas meteors, etc were seen the paarthas encountered a body of horse advancing towards them the kuru army fled away . also the sons of dhrita raashtra almost all turned away from the fight at noon their fear was like to that after the fall of bhishma, etc. the paancaalas and the paandavas pursued them, and congratulated one another . the srinjayas pursued the kurus arjuna the chariot division nakula, etc shakuni. duryodhana rallied, foot soldiers, resisted by bhimasena and dhrish tadyumna bhima slew them yudhishthiras troops in vain tried to transgress duryodhana. duryodhana rallied a small force by a spirited address the paandavas, especially arjuna, rushed against them nakula, etc against shakuni . the mleccha king shaalva attacked the paandavas, who fled dhrishtadyumna shaalva dhrishtadyumna had his chariot, steeds, and charioteer destroyed by the elephant bhima, etc shaalva the paancaalas, etc lamented dhrishtadyumna slew the elephant with his mace, and saatyaki slew shaalva . kritavarman, rallying a portion of the kuru army, resisted the paandavas saatyaki king kshemakirti, whom he slew kritavarman saatyaki the paandavas, the paancaalas, etc became spectators kripa carried kritavarman away upon his chariot the whole army of duryodhana fled except duryodhana, who assailed all the paandavas, etc. then kritavarman came . duryodhana alone resisted the paandavas the kuru army once more rallied and fought duryodhana yudhishthira, etc. ashvatthaaman bhima sena shakuni yudhishthira, who was carried away by sahadeva on his chariot yudhishthira shakuni si. and caa. applauded uluka nakula krita varman saatyaki duryodhana dhrishtadyumna kripa the draupadeyas . the kurus were broken by the paandavas, but rallied by the sons of dhritaraashtra yudhi shthira kripa and kritavarman duryodhana despatched chariots against yudhishthira shikhandin, etc came to aid yudhishthira an awful battle ensued the were slain the paandavas and paancaalas resisted terrifying omens in nature were seen. shakuni exhorted the others to fight in front he would himself slay the paandavas from behind the madrakas rejoiced, but were slain shakuni with, horsemen assailed the paandava army in the rear the force of the paandavas broke n. yudhishthira urged sahadeva to slay shakuni, aided by the draupadeyas yudhishthira, with the paancaalas, would himself destroy the chariot force. sahadeva the draupadeyas shakuni, who, with, horses, went away similarly, the paandava force, which was reduced to, horses the draupadeyas proceeded to dhrishtadyumna, sahadeva to yudhishthira shakuni dhrishtadyumnas division after a terrible battle the paandavas encompassed shakuni . shakuni exhorted the remainder of his following, horses, and urged duryodhana to attack the paandavas the remnant of the kuru army attacked the paandavas arjuna addressed krishna, recounting the loss sustained by the kurus, and attacked the remnant of the kuru army, and caused a great slaughter . dhrishtadyumna, etc the chariot force duryodhana escaped on horseback to shakuni, elephants encompassed the paandava brothers, and were slain by arjuna and bhima, etc. . ashvatthaaman, etc enquired about duryodhana, pierced through dhrishtadyumnas force, and proceeded to shakuni. the paandavas, headed by dhrishtadyumna, assailed the kurus. sanjaya dhrishtadyumna saatyaki sanjaya, who was made captive bhima and arjuna destroyed the elephants ashvatthaaman, etc seeking duryo dhana, proceeded to shakuni . eleven sons of dhritaraashtra durmarshana, etc bhimasena, who slew them. bhimasena then slew chariot warriors, foot, elephants, and horses . duryodhana and sudarsha were in the midst of the cavalry. krishna urged arjuna to destroy the remnant of duryodhanas troops arjuna assented only horses form the remnant of the troops of shakuni ... there remain also ashvatthaaman, etc. . bhimasena, etc duryodhana shakuni dhritaraashtras son sudarshana bhimasena susharman and shakuni arjuna duryodhana sahadeva. arjuna the trigartas arjuna slew satyakarman, satyeshu, and the prasthala ruler susharman, and the latters thirty five sons, etc and then proceeded against the remnant of the bharata host. bhima slew sudarshana, and completed the destruction of the kaurava army . shakuni sahadeva uluka bhimasena sahadeva sat n on his chariot bhima and sahadeva shakunis men, who fled away, but were rallied by duryodhana sahadeva nakula and bhima shakuni uluka sahadeva slew uluka shakuni sahadeva shakunis division and shakuni himself fled away, pursued by sahadeva, who slew him .
shama3, a king among the nandivegas .
shamatha, a brahman .
shaamba1, son of krishna and jaambavati . b sh when still a boy, had routed the army of the daitya shambara and killed ashvacakra, . b, . jaambavatisuta, jaambavatyaa suta .
shaamba2, a brahman .
shambara, an asura . b, . b, . daitya, daanavendra .
shambhalagraama, v. s.
shambhu1, an ancient king .
shambhu5, a fire .
shambhu6, a rudra .
shambhu7, son of krishna and rukmini .
shambuka. b, .
shambuka, a warrior of skanda. u, .
shamika1, a muni, father of shringin .
shamika2, a vrishni . the right spelling of this and prec. is s.
shampaaka, a brahman .
shamyu, a fire .
shanaishcara1, the planet saturn, son of surya . b, . suryaputra.
shaanavatya, pl a people .
shaandili, a goddess .
shaandili, a braahmani .
shaandilya, a rishi .
shankara2, a vishvedeva .
shankarshana, error in c. for sankarshana, q.v.
shankha1, a serpent .
shankha2, son of the matsya king viraata and brother of uttara .
shankha3, an ancient rishi, brother of likhita .
shankha4, a daitya .
shankha5, a treasure .
shankha6, a prince .
shankhashiras, a serpent . next.
shankhashirsha, a serpent . the prec.
shankhakumbhashravas, a maatri. u, .
shankhalikaa, a maatri. u, .
shankhamekhala, a rishi .
shankhamukha, a serpent .
shankhapada, son of manu svaarocisha. b
shankhapinda, a serpent .
shankhatirtha, a tirtha on the sarasvati. f here baladeva beheld a gigantic tree, mahaashankha, tall as meru, looking like shvetaparvata, and resorted to by many ri. there dwell y vd raa psh and si in thousands all of them, abaning other kinds of food, observe vows and regulations, and take at due seasons the fruits of that tree for their sustenance, and wander unseen by men, .
shankhini, a tirtha .
shanku, a vrishni .
shankukarna1, a serpent .
shankukarna2, son of janamejaya .
shankukarna3, a warrior of skanda. u, .
shankukarneshvara, a tirtha .
shaanta1, son of the vasu ahas .
shaantaa, daughter of the anga king lomapaada and wife of rishyashringa .
shaantabhaya, an ancient king .
shaantanava3, pl the descendants of shaantanu .
shaantanu, son of pratipa and father of bhishma, citraangada, and vicitravirya . b, . f, . b, . bhaarata, bhaaratagoptri, bharatasattama, kauravya, kurusattama, praatipa.
shaantanupaakhyaana . the raajarshi pratipa spent many years in ascetic penances at the source of gangaa. she sat upon his right thigh and wished him to be her husband. he replied that the left lap was for the wife, but the right for the daughters and daughters in law therefore he accepted her for his son, to which gangaa consented on the condition that his son should not be able to judge of the propriety of her acts. then pratipa, along with his wife, engaged in ascetic austerities from desire of offspring, and when they had grown old, mahaabhisha was born as a son to them and was called shaantanu, because his father had controlled his passion . when shaantanu had grown to become a youth, pratipa told him about his appointment with the celestial damsel, installed him upon the throne, and retired into the woods. shaantanu, who was addicted to hunting, one day came upon the banks of gangaa, frequented by siddhas and caaranas, and there he requested gangaa, in the form of a lovely maiden, to become his wife .
shaanti1, an indra .
shaanti2, a rishi. c, .
shaanti3, son of angiras. b, .
shaantiparvan, the twelfth book of mhbhr . c, .
. b . bhishma said once b. ri. and ri. ri. proceeded to the western prabhaasa, and resolved to visit all the sacred waters on earth there were shukra, etc and indra they reached kaushiki on the day of full moon in the month of maagha, and then brahmasaras, where they gathered and ate the stalks of the lotus agastyas stalks had been taken away he complained of the increasing unrighteous ness, and thought of going to heaven in order not to live to see yet worse things the ri. took, each of them, the most frightful oaths to their own innocence but indra uttered a benediction instead of a curse, and confessed that he had stolen the stalks, not from cupidity, but from desire of hearing what ri. would say. agastya forgave him. then they pro ceeded to other tirthas .
sharabha1, a serpent .
sharabha2, a serpent .
sharabha3, an asura .
sharabha4, a rishi .
sharabha5, son of shishupaala . shishupaalasuta.
sharabha6, brother of shakuni .
sharabha, pl a people .
sharabhanga, a rishi .
shaaradandaayani, a kshatriya wife. c when appointed by her husband to raise offspring, sh. went out in the night and waited at a spot where four roads met, and having performed the pumsavana rite had three sons by a brahman, .
sharadvat1, a rishi . janamejaya said tell me the birth of kripa. vaish. said the maharshi gotama had a son sharadvat, born with arrows. sh. studied the dhanurveda in preference to the vedas, and by his austerities he came to master all weapons. indra was afraid of him, and sent the devakanyaa jaanapadi to disturb him. he fled from her but from his seed that had fallen upon a clump of reeds sprung two children, whom a soldier found and brought to king shaantanu. shaantanu, from pity, brought them up as his own children, whence he called them kripa and kripi. sh. by his tapas learnt what had happened and came to shaantanu and told him his lineage, etc. he then instructed kripa in the fourfold dhanurveda and various shaastras, and in a short time kripa became an eminent teacher, who instructed the dhaartaraashtras, paandavas, yaadavas, vrishnis, and other princes from various countries in the dhanurveda, . gautama.
sharadvat3, pl .
shaaradvati, an apsaras .
shaaradvatisuta, = ashvatthaaman, .
sharana1, a serpent .
sharaasana, son of dhritaraashtra .
sharastamba, a tirtha. b, by bathing in the waterfalls at sh kushastamba, and dronasharmapada, one becomes worshipped by apsarases.
sharava, pl v. shabara.
sharaavati, a river in bhaaratavarsha .
sharmaka, pl a people .
sharmin, a brahman .
sharmishthaa, daughter of the asura king vrishaparvan and the second wife of yayaati . b, . also the following synonyms asurendrasutaa, . asuri, . vaarshaparvani, .
shaarnga, the bow of krishna . f sh. is said to have been in the possession of vishnu it was held by krishna, who obtained it, baffling the nooses of muru and slaying that asura, and vanquishing naraka while recovering the earrings set with gems, with, girls, etc .
shaarngakopaakhyana . janamejaya said why did the shaarngakas escape vaishampaayana said when the maharshi mandapaala, who was an urdhvaretas, had finished his tapas, he left his body and went to pitriloka, but did not obtain the expected result of his acts, and learned from the gods sitting around dharmaraaja that it was because he had no offspring. he then reflected how he could obtain numerous offspring in the shortest time possible he learnt that the birds were peculiarly prolific, and, becoming a shaarngika, he married the shaarngikaa jaritaa, and begat upon her four sons, who were all reciters of the vedas. then he left her and married lapitaa. when agni came to the forest of khaandava to burn it n, mandapaala praised agni and prevailed upon him to spare his children . jaritaa told her sons, who would have her to rescue herself by abaning them, to conceal themselves in the hole of a mouse but they were afraid of the mouse . finally jaritaa was prevailed upon by her sons to aban them, and agni approached the spot where the sons were . the four young rishis praised agni, who promised them safety and granted them a boon. drona asked him to consume the cats that troubled them every day . mean while manda paala addressed lapitaa, being anxious about his children. lapitaa, from jealousy, told him to go to jaritaa, who, she said, was the real cause of his anxiety. when agni had spared the children, jaritaa came and embraced them. when mandapaala came they did not speak to him, and jaritaa, from jealousy, told him to go to lapitaa. mandapaala declared that nothing was so destructive to the happiness of women as a concubine, except a lover witness arundhati . then all his children came forward to worship him, and he also spoke kindly to them all . mandapaala told that he had asked agni to protect them, and therefore he had not come earlier. then he took his wives and sons with him and went away to some other country .
shaarngarava, a brahman .
sharu, a devagandharva .
sharyaati, an ancient king, son of manu vaivasvata . b at the sacrifice of sh. indra drank soma with the ashvins, and cyavana paralysed indra and obtained sukanyaa, . b, . g, .
sharyaativana, a place .
shatabalaa, a river .
shatabhishaa, a nakshatra .
shatacandra, a kuru warrior .
shatashirshaa, wife of vaasuki, king of the serpents .
shatashringa, a mountain . b, .
shatadhanvan1, a prince. b, .
shatadhanvan2, a prince .
shatadru, a river, the modern sutlej . b, . next.
shatadyumna, an ancient king .
shataghantaa, name of a spear .
shataghantaa, a maatri. u, .
shatakumbhaa, a river .
shatalocana, a warrior of skanda. u, .
shatamaaya, an asura .
shatamukha, an asura. f dhaatri created the great asura sh who for a hundred years sacrificed the flesh of his own body into the sacrificial fire. gratified by this, shiva granted him yoga and eternal power, .
shataananda1, a rishi .
shataanandaa, a maatri. u, .
shataanika1, son of nakula paandava and draupadi . also the following synonyms nakuladaayaada, . nakulasya suta, . nakulaatmaja, . naakuli, .
shataanika3, a raajarshi of the kuru race .
shataanika4, brother of the matsya king viraata .
shatanjayaa, v. shatrunjayaa.
shataparvaa, the wife of shukra .
shatapatha, i.e. shatapatha braahmana . b, braahmana mukhe, a passage is quoted, nil. to the next verse
shataratha, an ancient king .
shatarudriya, a certain hymn of the yajurveda . b, . g, . d, .
shatasahasraka, a tirtha .
shatasaahasraka, a tirtha .
shatayupa, a kaikeya prince. b the r. ri. shatayupa had been the king of the kekayas having made over sovereignty to his son he had come into the woods, .
shataayus1, son of pururavas .
shataayus2, a kuru warrior, always mentioned together with shrutaayus .
shatha, an asura .
shatodari, a maatri. u, .
shatolukhalamekhalaa, a maatri. u, .
shatru, v. krodhashatru.
shatrughna1, son of dasharatha .
shatrunjaya2, son of dhritaraashtra .
shatrunjaya3, brother of karna .
shatrunjaya4, a kuru warrior .
shatrunjaya5, son of drupada .
shatrunjaya6, a kuru warrior .
shatrunjaya7, a sauvira king . b, .
shatrunjayaa, a maatri. u, .
shatruntaapa, a kuru warrior .
shatrusaha, son of dhritaraashtra .
shatrutaapana1, an asura .
shaunaka1, a descendant of bhrigu, at whose sacrifice ugrashravas recited the mhbhr . b, . c, . bhaargava, bhaargavottama, bhrigushaardula, bhrigudvaha, bhrigukulodvaha, bhrigunandana.
shaunaka2, a rishi .
shaunaka4. b, . shaunaka1.
shaundika, pl a people .
shauri3, = balaraama, .
shauri4, = saatyaki, .
shavala, shavalaashva, shavalaaksha, v. shab.
shavara, pl v. shabara.
shaya, pl a people .
shibi1, a king, son of ushinara . questioned by the paandavas about the greatness of the raajanyas, maarkandeya related suhotra, one of the kurus, on his return from a visit to the great rishis, met shibi aushinara seated on his chariot each of them regarding himself to be the equal of the other, refused to give way. naarada appeared and prevailed upon suhotra to give way, quoting three shlokas and declaring shibi to be superior, . maarkandeya tells the history of shibi aushinara being tried by indra and agni, . king sh. aushinara girded the earth round himself as if it were a leathern girdle, per formed many sacrifices, etc and acquired enormous wealth shiva granted him the boon that his wealth, etc should be inexhaustible. then he left this world for heaven, . b, . b, . b, . aushinara, shaibya8.
shibi3, an asura .
shibi4, name of an indra .
shibi5, a prince who sided with yudhishthira .
shibi, pl a people . e, .
shishumaara, name of a star or constellation .
shishumaaramukhi, a maatri. u, .
shishupaala, king of the cedis, son of damaghosha . b, . b in order to enhance the fame and honour of the paandavas, keshava formerly smote sh who was honoured by the karusha king, etc. then the other kings, deeming krishna unassailable when seated on his chariot, left the chief of the cedis and ran away, . . b, . also the following synonyms caidya, cedinaam adhipa, cedipa, cedipati, cedipungava, cediraaj, cediraaja, cedivrisha, q.v. shrautashrava, metron . damaghoshasuta, . damaghoshaatmaja, .
shishupaalavadhaparvan . as yudhishthira was afraid that his sacrifice might be obstructed, bhishma consoled him, saying that krishna was invincible . shishupaala again censured bhishma and krishna, and compared bhishma to the old swan, who always preached of virtue, so that the other birds gave him food and kept their eggs with him but the old swan used to eat up their eggs, till he was found out and slain . shishupaala censured krishnas behaviour towards jaraasandha bhima rushed up in anger, but was restrained by bhishma, while shishupaala was boasting . bhishma said shishupaala was born with three eyes and four hands, and brayed like an ass his parents resolved to aban him, but were prevented by an incorporeal voice who foreboded that that man in whose lap the child would be sitting, when its superfluous arms would fall n and the third eye on its forehead disappear, should be its slayer. though the child was placed upon the laps of, kings, this came not to pass until raama and krishna went to the capital of the cedis to see their fathers sister, when the boy was placed on the lap of krishna then the arms fell n and the eye disappeared. krishna granted to shishupaalas mother the boon that he would par offences of shishupaalas . bhishma declared that krishna himself had wanted to provoke the boast of shishupaala. shishupaala reproached bhishma because he did not rather praise the other kings, such as the baalhika king darada, or karna, etc. he compared bhishma to the bird bhulinga . bhishma expressed his contempt for such talk. the kings became angry and proposed to kill bhishma, who relied upon krishna . shishupaala challenged krishna, being desirous to slay him with all the paandavas. krishna related how shishupaala, hearing that the saatvatas had gone to praagjyotisha, came and burnt dvaarakaa that when king bhoja was sporting on the raivataka hill, he fell upon his attendants and slew many of them and led many away in chains to his own city in order to obstruct the sacrifice of krishnas father, he stole the sacrificial horse that had been let loose under the guard of armed men that he ravished the reluctant wife of babhru on her way from haastinapura to the sauviras that disguising himself in the attire of the kaarusha king, he had ravished bhadraa vaishaali that he had desired rukmini, but failed to obtain her that he had promised to par him times, and that the number had now become full. krishna then thought of his discus, which came into his hand therewith he instantly cut off the head of shishupaala the kings beheld a fiery energy issuing out of the body of shishupaala and entering krishnas body the sky, though cloudless, poured showers of rain, etc. yudhishthira caused his brothers to perform the funeral rites of shishupaala, the son of damaghosha then he, with all the kings, installed the son of shishupaala in the sovereignty of the cedis v. raajasuyikaparvan.
shishuroman, a serpent .
shighraa, a river .
shikhandin1, son of the paancaala king drupada, and father of kshattradeva อด, อด, อด, อด, อด, . also the following synonyms bhishmahantri, . bhishmanihantri, . shikhandini, . draupadeya, q.v. drupadaatmaja, q.v. paanshalya, q.v. yaajnaseni, q.v.
shikhandini, v. shikhandin1.
shikhaaprokta, said of pancashikha, .
shikhaavarta, a yaksha .
shikhaavat, a rishi .
shikhin2, a serpent .
shikshaka, a warrior of skanda. u, .
shilaayupa, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
shilin, a serpent .
shini1, father of satyaka and grandfather of saatyaki . e atri soma budha pururavas aayus nahusha yayaati yadu ...devamidha shura vasudeva in shuras race was born sh. about this time the svayamvara of devakas daughter devaki took place, whom sh. took up in his chariot for the sake of vasudeva. somadatta attacked sh who threw him to the earth, seized him by the hair and struck him with his foot, and then let him off. shiva granted somadatta that he should have a son who should in like manner strike sh.s son with his foot, .
shirishaka, a serpent .
shirshin, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
shita, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
shitaa, a river, v. sitaa.
shitaputanaa, a female demon .
shitavana, v. sitavana.
shitikantha2, a serpent .
shitikesha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
shiva2, name of a lac house .
shiva3, a fire .
shiva5, pl. . b, .
shivaa, wife of the vasu anila .
shivaa, wife of angiras .
shivaa, a braahmani .
shivaa, a river .
shivakarni, a maatri. u, .
shivi1, shiviputra, shivisunu, so c. for shib, q.v.
shivodbheda, name of a place .
shobhanaa, a maatri. u, .
shona, a river .
shonitoda, a yaksha .
shraddhaa, daughter of daksha and wife of dharma .
shraddhaa, daughter of vivasvat. b, .
shraaddhaparvan, the section relating to the shraaddha, the of the minor parvans of mhbhr . krishna censured gaandhaari, saying that this vast carnage had taken place by her fault, through her son duryodhana and told her not to grieve . gaandhaari remained silent. requested by dhritaraashtra, yudhishthira said that one billion, men had fallen and, had escaped the fallen had all attained to regions like those of indra . yudhishthira said that in the forest he had obtained the gift of spiritual vision from . ri. lomasha. urged by dhritaraashtra, yudhishthira ordered sudharman, etc to cause the funeral rites of the slain to be duly performed they burned them upon funeral pyres the pitrimedha rites were performed for some of the illustrious dead by the noise of saamans, rics, and lamentations all creatures became stupefied that night. then yudhishthira and dhritaraashtra proceeded towards the gangaa . the kuru ladies, etc performed the water rites for their fellow kinsmen at the gangaa. kunti, in a paroxysm of grief, disclosed the truth about karnas birth to her sons. the paandavas grieved, and yudhishthira lamented, hearing that karna was his elder brother . yudhishthira caused karnas wives, etc to be brought before him, and with them performed the water rite in honour of karna .
shraava, king of ayodhyaa .
shravana, a nakshatra . . g, .
shravanaja, adj. . b, jaa srishtir brahmana
shravas, a rishi. b, .
shraavastaka, king of ayodhyaa .
shraavasti, a city .
shrenimat, a king .
shri, the goddess of beauty and prosperity . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . p, . lakshmi, padmaa.
shrikunda, a tirtha .
shrikunja, a tirtha .
shrimadraajapura, a city, the capital of the kaalinga king citraangada .
shrimat1, son of nimi .
shrimati, a maatri. u, .
shripancami, a certain lunar .
shriparvata, a mountain .
shrivaaha, a serpent .
. b bhishma said naarada, who through his penance beholds both this and the other world at once, etc wandered through the three worlds. once at dawn he performed his ablutions in the gangaa, and so did indra. they listened to the narratives told by the great . ri. they hymned the rising sun, and then in the opposite direction beheld a luminous object riding on vishnus vehicle aned with garuda and surya it was shri with many aps. her names padmaa, etc. . she said that they had formerly dwelt with the asuras in consequence of her disposition to be bound by truth and merit seeing, however, that the asuras had assumed perverse natures, she had left them and wished to reside with indra. requested by indra, she told that she had dwelt with the asuras on account of their good behaviour, but after they had fallen off from virtue, she had deserted dai. and daa. and had come to indra there where reside, the seven other goddesses and jayaa as the eighth, who love me, etc desire to live all of them and myself, having deserted as have come to thee. . ri naarada, and indra gave her a hearty welcome. vaayu, the friend of agni, began to blow gently all the deities assembled heaven began to shower nectar upon the region of brahmaan, etc. indra began to pour rain no one deviated from the path of righteousness, etc. k y ra. became cheerful, etc. .
shrivatsa, the curl of hair on the breast of vishnu, .
shrutashravas1, a rishi .
shrutashravas2, a raajarshi .
shrutashri, a daitya .
shrutashruvas, v. shrutashravas1.
shrutadhvaja, a paandava warrior .
shrutaahvaya, v. shrutaayus4.
shrutakarman1, son of sahadeva and draupadi . shrutasena3, draupadeya.
shrutakarman2, son of arjuna and draupadi . shrutakirti.
shrutakarman3, son of dhritaraashtra .
shrutakirti, son of. arjuna and draupadi . aarjuni, shrutakarman2, draupadeya.
shrutaanika, a paandava warrior .
shrutaanta, son of dhritaraashtra .
shrutarvan1, a king .
shrutarvan2, son of dhritaraashtra .
shrutasena1, brother of janamejaya paarikshita .
shrutasena2, a serpent.
shrutasena3, son of sahadeva and draupadi . shrutakarman1.
shrutasena4, a daitya .
shrutasena5, a kuru warrior .
shrutasoma, v. sutasema.
shrutavat, v. shrutarvan2.
shrutaavati, daughter of bharadvaaja. y, . the viprarshi bharadvaaja saw the apsaras ghritaaci, then his vital seed came out. he caught it in his hand, and then kept it in a funnel of a leaf from that seed was born a girl, whom he in the presence of . and r. called sh. keeping the girl in his hermitage, bharadvaaja repaired to the forest of himavat, .
shrutaayudha1, king of the kalingas . shrutaayus2, kalinga, kaalinga, kalingaadhipati, kalingaka.
shrutaayudha2, a king .
shrutaayu, king of the ambashthas . ambashtha, ambashthapati.
shrutaayus3, brother of acyutaayus . shrutaayus1.
shrutaayus4, a paandava warrior .
shrutaayus5, a kuru warrior .
shruti, an ancient king .
shrutivarman, a kuru warrior .
shrigaala, a king .
shringavat, a mountain .
shringavera, a serpent .
shringaverapura, a city .
shringin1, son of shamika .
shubhaa, v. subhaa.
shubhakarman, a companion of skanda. u, .
shubhaangada, a king .
shubhaangi, a daashaarha princess, the wife of kuru .
shubhavaktraa, a maatri. u, .
shuci1, a month .
shuci2, a rishi .
shuci3, name of a caravan leader .
shuci4, a fire .
shuci8, a son of vicvaamitra. b, .
shuci1, a son of bhrigu. b, .
shucikaa, an apsaras .
shucishmitaa, an apsaras .
shucivrata, an ancient king .
shuddha, pl a class of gods .
shudra, pl a people, mostly mentioned together with the abhiras .
shudra2, pl. = shiva .
shuka1, son of vyaasa . ee, . b, . c, . aaraneya, aranisuta, dvaipaayanaatmaja, vaiyaasaki, vyaasaatmaja.
shuka2, a raakshasa, a counsellor of raavana .
shuka3, name of a weapon .
shuka4, a gandhaara warrior, the son of subala .
shuka, pl parrots .
shukaabhipatana, . hearing the words of naarada, shuka understood that great misery follows the acquisition of children and wives, and that one has to undergo great labour in order to acquire science and vedic lore. he resolved to attain to the highest end, that is fraught with the greatest felicity, and whence there is no return into the ocean of births that cannot be attained without yoga shall therefore have recourse to yoga, and throwing off this body shall become transformed into wind and enter the sun for he s not wane like the moon with the gods when after death one enters the moon he falls to earth and thence ascends to heaven with the great rishis shall enter the energy of the sun declare before all the creatures... earth, ... daa g psh u raa and r that shall enter all creatures in the world. obtaining naaradas per mission, shuka went to vyaasa, who asked him to stay there for the day that he might behold him for some time. but shuka, only intent on emancipation, immediately left him and proceeded to kailaasa, which was inhabited by crowds of ascetics . having reached the summit of kailaasa, shuka set himself to practise yoga . having then obtained the permission of naarada, he soared into the skies and identified himself with the element of wind aps g r etc wondered. shuka proceeded in silence, his face turned towards the east, regarding the sun then to the malaya mountain urvashi and purvacitti, who always dwell on malaya, wondered. shuka asked the gods, etc to return his father an answer from him, if he should repeatedly call on him . shuka freed himself of the four kinds of faults, the eight kinds of tamas, the five kinds of rajas, the attribute of sattva, and then dwelt in braahman. meteors began to shoot, etc. indra poured showers of rain himavat and meru, each yojanas in height and breadth, were in close contact with each other. journeying towards the north, shuka clashed against them, and they were immediately broken in two. he was aed by g r y raa and vidyaadharas. he saw from a high region the celestial stream mandaakini running below, with many aps. beholding shuka, who was bodyless, those unclad aรซrial beings felt no shame. vyaasa followed behind him on the same aรซrial path, by means of high yoga. shuka, above the region of the wind, identified himself with braahman. ri. represented to vyaasa the achievements of his son. he indulged in lamentations shuka, who had entered the universe, had become the soul of everything, and had acquired omnipresence, answered by uttering bho in the form of an echo, and the entire universe echoed the answer of shuka from that time mountain caves and mountain sides still echo sounds uttered there. having cast off all the attributes of sound, etc and showing his yoga prowess in the manner of his disappearance, shuka in this way attained to the highest station. vyaasa sat n and began to think of his son with grief the aps. who were sporting on the banks of the celestial stream mandaakini saw him seated there, and all became agitated with shame. shiva, with g and great ri came and comforted vyaasa, who by the favour of shiva thenceforward always beheld a sha of his son by his side. this naarada and vyaasa repeatedly told me in days of yore .
shukakriti . bhishma said to yudhishthira vyaasa desired shuka to study the mokshadharma shuka mastered all the treatises on yoga, as also the science promulgated by kapila. then vyaasa caused him to go to janaka, the king of mithilaa, and not to the skies nor should he think himself superior to janaka, though he was only his yaajya. crossing the varshas of meru and hari and himavat, shuka came to bhaaratavarsha. having seen many countries inhabited by cinas and hunas, he reached aaryaavarta, and at last the country of the videhas, protected by janaka, and then mithilaa. he had not been fatigued on the way. he obtained permission to enter the city, but was at first roughly forbidden to enter the palace. at last he was admitted into the first chamber thence he was led into the second chamber by the minister, and thence into a garden that was like a second caitraratha, with damsels equal to the aps who entertained shuka and gave him to eat he, however, went unaffected through his rites, and in the first part of the night he devoted himself to yoga . the next morning he was received by janaka, and was instructed by him about moksha and the duties of a brahman ordinarily the purified understanding necessary for attaining moksha cannot be obtained without passing through all four stages of religious life but he who in the course of many births has obtained a pure mind, may attain to moksha even in the very first stage, and then there is no need for the three other stages, quoting a saying of king yayaati through the favour of thy father have acquired to omniscience thy knowledge is much greater than what you think it to be .
shukakritya . bhishma said to yudhishthira having heard the words of janaka, having entered soul by soul and having seen self by his self, shuka without putting further questions to janaka, proceeded northwards to shaishira . at that time naarada proceeded to himavat . then shuka came to the asylum of vyaasa. one day the disciples asked vyaasa to let no sixth disciple be skilled in the veda. vyaasa answered that they ought to multiply, and the veda to be spread, and taught them the qualifications of persons that can be accepted as disciples, and the rules in respect of the study of the veda . the disciples of vyaasa took leave of him and descended from the mountain to the earth for the purpose of subdividing the vedas there they performed the agnishtoma, etc at the sacrifices of brahmans, kshattriyas, and vaishyas, and taught the veda. vyaasa remained with shuka, passing his days in anxious thoughtfulness. naarada came and asked him why vedic sounds were silent now, so that the mountain now resembled a hamlet of nishaadas, and ri and g. did no longer shine as before and exhorted vyaasa to recite the veda and thereby dispel the fears arising from raa. vyaasa and shuka then set themselves to recite the veda. one day a violent wind arose which vyaasa declared to be an omen that the recitation of the veda should be suspended and he explained the devayaana and the pitriyaana, and the winds, especially pravaha, aavaha, udvaha, samvaha, vivaha, parivaha, paraavaha this wind is the breath of vishnus nostrils. having said this vyaasa plunged into the celestial ganges.
shuka naarada samvaada . bhishma said to yudhishthira naarada then came to shuka for the object of asking shuka the meaning of certain portions of the veda. naarada related what sanatkumaara had said in days of yore to certain rishis about avoiding attachment, etc in order to attain to final emancipation with the aid of such instructions the deities succeeded in leaving the earth and became the denizens of heaven.
shukara, pl a people .
shukasya aashrama, a tirtha .
shukla1, one or two paandava warriors .
shukotpatti . questioned by yudhishthira about shuka, whose mind became bent on braahman when he was a mere boy, bhishma answered the ri. did not make merit depend upon age, etc but upon the study of the vedas and upon tapas the merit of, horse sacrifices or vaajapeyas cannot come up to even of the merit that arises from yoga. once on the summit of meru, mahaadeva sported with his followers and paarvati, while vyaasa, devoted to yoga and dhaaranaa, practised austerities for years for the sake of obtaining a son, subsisting on air alone, aing mahaadeva. thither went ri b. ri lp s aa r surya, candramas, indra, m the oceans, the rivers, a g naarada, parvata, vishvaavasu, si and aps. this has been told to me by maarkandeya. shiva granted him that he would have a son like to fire, wind, earth, water, and space, and devoted to braahman . vyaasa was one day employed in rubbing his sticks to make a fire, when he beheld the aps. ghritaaci, and fell in love with her. when she approached, transformed into a she parrot, he dropped his seed, which became a son, who, from this circumstance, came to be called by the name of shuka. gangaa came and bathed him in her waters g. sung, and aps. danced, etc. vishvaavasu, tumburu, naa haahaa, and huhu eulogized the birth of shuka there came lp. with shakra, . ri and b. ri. maaruta showered celestial flowers shiva, together with paarvati, invested shuka with the sacred thread shakra gave him a celestial kamandalu and celestial robes, etc. as soon as shuka was born, the vedas, including the mysteries and abstracts, came to dwell in him, just as they dwelt in his father. shuka selected brihaspati for his pre ceptor, remembering the universal practice. having studied the vedas, the tradition, and the state policy, shuka returned home, after paying his pre ceptor the tuition fee. ating the vow of a brahmacaarin he practised the hardest penances, even in his childhood. taking no pleasure in the three modes of life, he only kept in view the law of emancipation .
shukra1, the upaadhyaaya of the asuras and the planet venus . f, . b, .upamanyuaanushaasanik.bhaargava, tandi communicated the, names of shiva to sh and sh. to gautamabrihaspatisuvarnotpattithe fifth of the seven sons of bhrigu, shapathavidhiaanushaasanik.shsya ca balesh caiva samvaadambhrigukulodvaha, .the planetashramavaas.asureshu, vidura excelled cukra in intelligencepage2 a son of kavicukrenoshanasaashukraushanasamushanasamaharshibhrigushreshthaushanasaushanasaushanasaaa shloka recited by him in order to induce the asuras to aban jambha, is quotedshukrasyaushanaa kaavya, on meruhad performed austerities at kapaalamocanaamong the rishis who surrounded bhishma as he lay on his arrow bedwent to heavenushanaa second son of kavibhaargavasenaapatir abhut...kaavyo daityapater ivashukramunekaavyamkaavyaatshukrenakaavyakaavyasyakaavyasyashukrena...kaavyenaso duhitaa devayaaniushanaa veda yac chaastrambrihaspaty ushanoktaish ca nayaibrihaspaty ushanoktaish ca mantraiushanaa iva caapara vyuhya caushanasam vyuham, sc. raavanabuddhyaa tulyo hy ushanasaa, sc. dronabhavaan ushanasaa tulya, sc. bhishmakaavyakavinaam ushanaa kavi, sc. asmi, says krishnadaityaanaam ivoshanabrihaspaty ushanastulyo buddhyaa, sc. dronavyuham...brihaspaty ushano matamnaye brihaspaty ushano sadaa samam, sc. dronabuddhyaa coshanasaa samam, sc. ashvatthaamana shloka sung by him is quotedbrihaspaty ushanasor...upadeshaushanaa veda yac chaastrammaharshinaa, two shlokas sung by him are quoteda shloka of his is quotedbuddhyaa tvam i.e. the mouse palita ushanaa saakshaattwo gaathaas of his are quotedtwo gaathas sung by him to prahlaada are quoteddaiteyaan ushanaa praaha samshayacchedanam puraawas about to instruct vritra about vishnumuninaamahaamuni, worshipped shivadevarshi...kaavyamahaa munigata shukratvamushanaa brihaspatish caiva yapattau bhavishyata tadaa pravakshyata shaastramamong the rishis who sur rounded bhishma as he lay on his arrow bedushanaa veda yac chaastramfourth son of kavibhaargava, c. maarutoshanasa, b. maarutaushanasesa, sc. lokamushanaa veda yac chaastram
shukra2, a month .
shuktimat, a mountain .
shuktimati, a river .
shuktimati, a city .
shuktisaahvaya, adj. .
shuna, an ancient king .
shunashepha, son of ricika .
shunasakha, the name of indra, disguised as a mendicant. b, . b, .
shunaka1, a rishi . b, .
shunaka2, one or more princes .
shundika, pl a people .
shunyapaala, a rishi .
shura1, an ancient king .
shura2, a yaadava, father of vasudeva and kunti . e, . b, .
shura3, son of ilina .
shura5, a sauvira, one of the standard bearers of jayadratha .
shura6, a prince .
shura8, pl. .
shurasena1, pl a people p, อด, p, . b, . shurasenaraaj.
shurasena2, a kuru warrior .
shurasena3, a paancaala warrior .
shurpanakhaa, name of a female raakshasa .
shurpaaraka, name of a place . b, . w, .
shvaavillomaapaha, a tirtha . next.
shveta1, one or more ancient kings . b, .
shveta2, a muni .
shveta3, one of the elephants of the quarters .
shveta4, a prince .
shveta5, a mountain . g, . shvetaacala, shvetaparvata.
shveta7, a varsha .
shveta8, a paandava warrior .
shveta9, a warrior of skanda. u, .
shveta1, an island . b, . c, . b, . shvetadvipa.
shveta1, pl. = the inhabitants of shvetadvipa . b, .
shvetaa, a maatri. u, .
shvetabhadra, a yaksha .
shvetaacala, a mountain . b, . shveta5, shvetaparvata.
shvetadvipa, an island . b, . c, . b, . cveta1.
shvetaketu1, a muni, son of uddaalaka . b the muni sh son of uddaalaka, established the present usage among men that the sin of violating matrimonial chastity is regarded like to that of killing an embryo this sh. established from anger, as one in the presence of his father, a brahman came and seized his mother by the hand and took her away uddaalaka, however, excused the fact as it was the practice sanctioned by antiquity, .
shvetaki, an ancient king . shvetaketu2.
shvetaparvata, a mountain . . f, . shveta5, shvetaacala.
shvetasiddhi, a warrior of skanda. u, .
shvetavaktra, a warrior of skanda. u, .
shyaama, a mountain in shaakadvipa. b, .
shyaamaayaa aashrama, a tirtha. m, .
shyaamaayana, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
shyena, a rishi .
shyena, pl. .
shyenacitra, an ancient king .
shyenajit1, son of dala .
shyenajit2, a prince .
. b bhishma said once a pigeon, pursued by a hawk, dropped n from the skies and sought the protection of the kaashi king r. ri. vrishadarbha, etc. . the three worlds together with indra came to behold the king he was bathed in a shower of nectar, etc. g and aps. began to sing and dance around him, just, as they around brahmaan he then ascended a celestial chariot and proceeded to the eternal heaven. blessing upon the reader.
shyenakapotiya . indra in the shape of a hawk and agni in that of a pigeon in fear of the hawk came to test king ushinaras merit . ushinara in vain offered the hawk another beast, and thereafter his king, in order that he might spare the pigeon at last the hawk agreed upon receiving the pigeons weight of ushinaras flesh ushinara cut portion after portion of his flesh and placed it in the balance, and as it did not out weigh the pigeon he mounted the scale himself, utterly devoid of flesh. then indra said as long as man shall speak of thee, so long...thou shalt inhabit the holy regions. saying this indra ascended to heaven, and so did king ushinara in a radiant shape, after having filled heaven and earth with his merits .
dashaashva, a king of maahishmati. b, .
dashaashvamedha, a tirtha .
dashaashvamedhika, a tirtha .
dashagriva1, a daitya .
dashajyotis, son of subhraaj .
dashamaalika, pl a people .
dashaapaarshva, pl a people .
dasharatha, king of ayodhyaa and father of raama. b, . e, .
daasharatha, adj. .
dashaarha, pl a people . daashaarha, pl.
daashaarha, pl a people . c, . dashaarha, pl.
daashaarha, adj. .
dashaarna, pl a people .
dashaarnaadhipati3, the king of the dashaarnas at the time of the great battle .
daashaarnaka, adj. .
daashaarnesha, the king of the dashaarnas at the time of the great battle .
daashaarnika, adj. . daashaarnaka.
dashaavara, an asura .
dasheraka, pl a people . next.
daasheraka, pl a people . prec.
dashividarbha, pl a people .
dadhica, an ancient rishi . gg, . dadhici.
dadhimukha1, a serpent .
dadhimukha2, a monkey .
dadhivaahanapautra. b, .
dahadahaa, a maatri. u, .
dahana1, one of the eleven rudras .
dahana3, a companion of skanda. u, .
dahati, a companion of skanda. u, .
daaho jatugrihasya .
daiteya, pl a class of the enemies of the gods . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . asura, pl. daitya, pl. daanava, pl. ditija, pl.
daiteya, sg. . names of single daiteyas ashvapati, . baana, . shibi, . hiranyakashipu, . ilvala, . maya, . prahlaada, . taaraka, . vegavat, . vipracitti, . virocana, . virupaaksha, . asura, sg. daitya, sg. daanava, sg.
daiteya, adj. .
daitya, pl a class of the enemies of the gods . b, . d, . b, . b, . d, . e, . b, . d, . d, . c, . b, . u, . gg, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . k, . l, . b, . d, . b, . b, . asura, pl. daitya, pl. daanava, pl. ditija, pl.
daitya, sg. . d, . names of single daityas bali, . shambara, . dhundhu, . ilvala, . maya, . namuci, . naraka, . prahlaada, . raahu, . taaraka, . vaataapi, . vrishaparvan, . vritra, . asura, daiteya, daanava.
daitya, adj. . b, .
daityadvipa, a suparna, son of garuda .
daityasenaa, daughter of prajaapati and sister of devasenaa .
daksha1, a prajaapati . praacetas had sons, from them sprang the muni daksha praacetasa, and from him the creatures, . daksha had from his wife virini, sons, whom naarada taught the saankhya as a means of salvation . then daksha made his daughters his putrikaa, and bestowed of them to dharma, etc . i, . u, . c daksha begat sixty daughters, who were all taken as wives by brahmarshis from them sprung all creatures p. ganaa, g aps diverse kinds of raa birds and animals and fishes, etc and vegetables, and all beings that are oviparous or viviparous or born of filth, . b, . b, . b, . b, . n, . b, caused a third eye to appear on the forehead of shiva
daksha2, a suparna, son of garuda .
daksha5, a vishvadeva .
daksha7, a king .
dakshakanyaa kadru, .
dakshaprokta shivasahasranaamastotra . b daksha praised shiva by enumerating his names, and adding some further praises. shiva became gratified and granted daksha some further boons then shiva disappeared. blessing to the reader.
. b vaishampaayana said in days of yore daksha made arrangements for performing a sacrifice on the top of himavat in that sacred region inhabited by ri. and si g. and aps where the gangaa issues out of the mountains. the gods, etc came there. ri. dadhica in wrath and grief said that this was no sacrifice, since rudra was not aed in it, etc. he, the great yogin, saw into the future he beheld shiva seated with naarada and umaa. daksha said he knew the eleven rudras with lances and matted locks, but he did not know who this maheshvara was. daksha said that he would perform the sacrifice unto vishnu. umaa felt grief. shiva said that it is to him as the lord of sacrifices that the chanters utter their praises in sacrifices, etc. . then he created from his mouth a terrible being, and umaa herself, assuming the terrible form of mahaakaali, proceeded in the company of that being, that was the living embodiment of shivas wrath and resembled shiva himself, and came to be called virabhadra. he then created from the pores of his body a large number of spirit chiefs named raumyas. these rudras attacked the sacrifice and began to set fire to everything, and tore off the head of the sacrifice. . and brahmaan and daksha, informed by virabhadra, hymned shiva, who, asked by daksha, granted to him the boon that his sacrificial articles should be of use to him. then daksha knelt n and uttered his names .
daakshaayani, pl. . b, .
dakshinaapatha, the land in south .
dakshinaapatha, pl. . daakshinaatya, pl.
daakshinaatya, pl. . next.
daakshinaatya, adj. . prec.
daakshinaatya, sg. .
dakshinaayanamrityu, pl. .
dala, son of king parikshit of ayodhyaa, and sushobhanaa the daughter of the frog king .
daalbhya2, a tirtha .
daalbhya3, a rishi named together with baka .
daalbhyaghosha, a tirtha .
dama1, son of bhima, the vidarbha king .
dama2, a rishi .
daamacandra, a paandava warrior .
daamagranthi, the name which nakula assumed in the palace of viraata . granthika.
damana1, an ancient king .
damana2, a brahmarshi .
damana3, son of the vidarbha king bhima .
damana4, a kuru warrior .
damayanti, daughter of the vidarbha king bhima, wife of nala and mother of indrasena and indrasenaa . . bhaimi, bhimanandini, bhimaputrikaa, bhimasutaa, vaidarbhi, vidarbhaadhipatinandini, vidarbharaajatanayaa, vidarbhatanayaa.
dambara, a companion of skanda. u, .
dambhodbhava, an ancient king .
dambhodbhavopaakhyaana . there was a king of yore named dambhodbhava, who was at the head of the earth his sovereignty extended over the whole world. every morning he used to ask if there were anyone superior or even equal to himself. certain brahmans counselled him to curb his pride and as he continued to ask the brahmans the same question day after some high souled brahmans mentioned to him the ascetics nara and naaraayana, who have taken their birth in the race of men, and are now practising penances on gandhamaadana. the king marched to the spot with a large army, and found them emaciated with hunger and thirst, etc. he desired a battle with them. the rishis declined but as he repeatedly summoned them to fight, nara took up a handful of grass blades, and therewith baffled all their arrows and cut off the eyes and ears and noses of the warriors. the king fell at the feet of the rishis and said, let me be blessed. nara then told him to be obedient to the brahmans and be virtuous. the king returned to his city, and from that time began to practise righteousness.
damsha, an asura .
damin, a tirtha .
daamoshnisha, a muni .
daanava, pl a class of the enemies of the gods . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, . d, . b, . u, . dd, . gg, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . g, . b, . b, . k, . l, . m, . p, . b, . b, . g, . asura, pl. daiteya, pl. daitya, pl. daanaveya, pl. danuja, pl. danuputra, pl.
daanava, sg. . names of single daanavas bali, . shaalva, . dirghajihva, . durjaya, . hara, . hiranyakashipu, . ilvala, . kaitabha, . mada, . mahisha, . maya, . naraka, . pitha, . prahlaada, . puloman, . raahu, . taaraka, . vipracitti, . vivindhya, . vritra, .
daanava, dual madhu and kaitabha .
daanava, adj. .
daanavarshi, pl. .
daanaveya, pl. = daanava, pl .
danaayus, daughter of daksha and wife of kashyapa .
danda1, brother of the magadha king dandadhaara .
danda2, a follower of surya . b, .
danda3, a paandava warrior .
dandabaahu, a warrior of skanda. u, .
dandadhaara1, king of the magadhas . girivrajeshvara, maagadha.
dandadhaara2, son of dhritaraashtra อด, .
dandadhaara3, various paandava warriors .
dandagauri, an apsaras .
dandaka1, pl a people . b, .
dandaka2, a forest . next.
dandaketu, a prince .
dandaakhya, a tirtha . dandaartta.
dandaarta, a tirtha . dandaakhya.
dandasena, a prince .
dandin1, son of dhritaraashtra .
daanta1, a son of the vidarbha king bhima .
daantaa, an apsaras. b, .
dantakura. d, . c, .
dantavakra, a king .
dantavaktra, v. dantavakra.
dantolukhalikaa, a kind of ascetics, .
danu, daughter of daksha and wife of kashyapa, mother of the daanavas .
danuja, pl. = daanava, pl .
danuputra, pl. = daanava, pl .
darada, pl a people .
darada, a baalhika king . b . rent the earth as soon as he was born, .
darbhi, an ancient rishi .
darshaka, pl a people .
darshapa, pl a class of gods .
dardura, a mountain .
dari, a serpent .
darpa, son of adharma and shri .
daaruka, the charioteer of krishna .
daaruki, the charioteer of pradyumna . prec.
daaruna1, a suparna, son of garuda .
daaruna2, pl a people .
darva, pl a people . next.
daarva, pl a people . prec.
darvi, a country .
darvisamkramana, a tirtha .
daasamiya, pl a people . next.
daasaniya, a people .
daasarha, v. daash.
daaseraka, v. daash.
daaseyi, v. daash.
daasi, a river .
dasra, one of the ashvins . b, .
dasyu, pl .
dasyumat, a fire .
datta, a rishi . dattaatreya.
dattaatman, a vishvadeva .
dattaatreya, a rishi . b, . b, .
daushaasana1, patron v. daushaasani.
daushaasana2, adj. .
daushaasani, patron the son of dushaasana dhaartaraashtra .
daurmukhi, a paandava warrior .
dauryodhana, adj. .
dauryodhani, patron. = lakshmana, .
daushmanta, v. daushyanti.
daushmanti, v. daushyanti.
daushyanta, adj. .
daushyanti, patron. = bharata, .
dauvaalika, pl a people .
devasharman, a rishi . b, .
devadaaruvana, a tirtha. k, .
devadatta, the conch shell of arjuna .
devaadhipa1, a prince .
devaduta1, . do .
devagana, pl. . bis, .
devagandharva, pl. . gan dharva, pl.
devagraha, a demon of disease .
devahavya, a rishi .
devahotra, a rishi. c, .
devahrada, name of various tirthas . t, .
devaahvaya, an ancient king .
devaka1, a gandharva king .
devaka2, one or more princes . e, .
devakanyaa, . apsaras.
devaki, daughter of devaka, wife of vasudeva, and mother of krishna . e, .
devakuta, a sacred mountain .
devala, v. asita devala.
devamata, a rishi. b, .
devamaatri, pl .
devamidha, a yaadava prince. e, .
devamitraa, a maatri. u, .
devanagara . devapura.
devapatha, a tirtha .
devaapi, son of pratipa .
devaprastha, a city .
devapura . devanagara.
devaraaja4, an ancient king .
devaaranya, pl .
devaraata1, a prince .
devaraata2, a muni, son of vishvaamitra . b, .
devarshi1, pl. . b, . b, . u, . z, . aa, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . f, . b, .
devarshi2, sg. names of single devarshis asita, . bhurbhuva, . brihaspati, . kashyapa, . lomasha, . naarada, . parvata, . tanu, . ushanas, . vasishtha, .
devasenaa, the wife of skanda .
devasthaana, a brahmarshi .
devaasura, adj .
devaatithi, a prince .
devavana, name of a sacred place .
devaavridha, a prince อด, .
devayaajin, a warrior of skanda. u, .
devayaana, subst .
devayaani, daughter of ushanas and wife of yayaati . when kaca had imparted to the gods the sanjivani they set out with indra at their head to defeat the asuras. in a wood like caitraratha, indra transformed himself into wind and mixed up the clothes of some bathing maidens. a quarrel about the clothes resulted in .s being thrown into a well by sharmishthaa, the daughter of vrishaparvan. yayaati found her and drew her up by her right hand, and then returned to his capital. devayaani sent ghurnikaa to inform shukra of what had passed . shukra threatened vrisha parvan that he would leave the asuras, until sharmishthaa, together with, maidens, was given to . . surrounded by sharmishthaa and, maidens, devayaani one day again met yayaati, who at her request received her in marriage from shukra, and promised that he would never invite sharmishthaa to share his bed, . devayaani gave birth to a son. after, years had elapsed, sharmishthaa attained to puberty and prevailed upon yayaati to beget a son also with her to devayaani she said that she had born the child to a rishi whose name she had not dared to ask. the sons of devayaani were yadu and turvasu, those of sharmishthaa were druhyu, anu, and puru. one when devayaani was walking in the wood together with yayaati, she met the children of sharmishthaa and asked them who is your father they then pointed to yayaati. devayaani in anger withdrew to ushanas, followed by yayaati. ushanas cursed yayaati to be overcome by decrepitude, yet with the permission of trans ferring it to someone else, and he added that that son of yayaati who would give him his own youth should succeed yayaati on the throne, etc . e, . aushanasi, bhaargavi, shukratanayaa.
devi, an apsaras .
devi, the wife of varuna .
devikaa, wife of yudhishthira .
devikaa, a river . c, . i by bathing in d. and in sundarikaahrada, as also in the tirtha ashvini, one acquires great beauty after death, . b, .
devyaas tirtha, a tirtha .
dhaama, pl a class of celestial beings, mostly mentioned together with the yaamas . u, .
dhamadhamaa, a maatri. u, .
dhanada2, a follower of kubera .
dhanada3, a mountain. b, .
dhananjaya2, a serpent .
dhananjaya4, pl a family of brahmans .
dhananjayaa, name of an army. u, .
dhanin, the messenger of the kapas. p, .
dhanurdhara1, a son of dhritaraashtra . dhanurgraha.
dhanurgraha, a son of dhritaraashtra อด, . next.
dhanurgraaha, a son of dhritaraashtra . prec.
dhanurvaktra, a warrior of skanda. u, .
dhanurveda1 . b the dh. is both celestial and human, and consists of four branches and ten divisions, . d, . b, . u, . b, . f, . b, . b, . c, .
dhanushaakhya, a rishi. c, . next.
dhanushaaksha, a rishi . prec.
dhanvantara2, v. dhanvantari.
dhanvantari1, the celestial physician .
dhaanvantarya, a sacrifice .
dhara1, one of the vasus . prithu.
dhara2, a paandava warrior .
dhara5, v. tvashtaadhara.
dhaaraa, a tirtha .
dhaarana1, a prince .
dhaarana2, a serpent .
dharanidhara, pl. .
dharma1, the god of justice . b, . b, . u, . b, . b, . b, married ten daughters of daksha, naaraayana took birth as dharmas son in a ble form, viz. as nara and naaraayananaro naaraayanash caiva jaatau dhkulodvahaujanma dhgrihe caiva nara naaraayanaatmakamsudarshanop.in the shape of a brahman dh. put sudarshana to the testvishvaamitrop.saakshaad dha ivaaparavitahavyop.aanushaasanik.aanushaa sanik.among the seven dharanidharaajanakain the shape of a brahman dh. examined janakauttankathe eldest son of krishna nakulaakhyanain the shape of a brahman dh. put a brahman family to the testagastyajamadagniin order to put jamadagni to test dh. assumed the form of krodha at last krodha was cursed to become a mungooseaashramavaasap.yudhi shthira is identified with dh.has been born as vidura through the curse of maandavya, putradarshanap.sya janani, i.e. kunti, dh. = yudhishthiravidura and yudhishthira had been born from portions of dh.mahaaprasthaanikap.followed the paandavas on their mahaaprasthaana in the shape of a svargaarohanap.after death vidura and yudhishthira entered dh.
dharmada, a warrior of skanda. u, .
dharmanetra, grandson of the elder dhritaraashtra .
dharmaprastha, a tirtha .
dharmaaranya, one or more sacred woods . q, .
dharmatirtha, name of two tirthas .
dhaarshthadyumna or dhaarshtadyumni .
dhaartaraashtra, pl . dhritaraashtraja, pl dhritaraashtraputra, pl dhritaraashtrasuta, pl dhritaraashtraat maaja, pl. note. a list of the names of the sons of dhritaraashtra is given, and .
dhaartaraashtra, adj. .
dhaartaraashtrasuta1, pl. .
dhaartaraashtrasuta2, pl. .
dhaatri . b, . h, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, made the vajrabrahma rudras.dhaatur aadyam vidhaanamaanushaasanik.nunam hi paapakarmaano dhaatraa srishtaa smaheidentified with shiva param dhaataa vidhaataa ca, sc. shiva srishtvaa dvijaatin dhaataaumaa maheshvaras.braahmanaa lokasaarena srishtaa dhaatraaaanushaasanik.the fifth of the aadityasshivaidentified with shivagurushishyasamv.= mahaan aatmaaanugitaap.sakhyan caitat kritam dhaatraa
dhaumra, a rishi .
dhaumya1, the purohita of the paandavas, younger brother of asita devala . some of these quotations may perhaps refer to one of the rishis under the heading dhaumya2. aagniveshya.
dhaumya2, name of one or more rishis . g, . some of these quotations may also refer to dhaumya1.
dhaumya aayoda, v. aayoda dhaumya.
. arjuna gave his aagneya weapon to the gandharva citraratha and said let the horses you give us remain with you for some time when occasion comes we will take them from you. then the paandavas took leave of the gandharva, and left the banks of the bhaagirathi. at that time dhaumya, the younger brother of devala, was dwelling at the tirtha named utkocaka, engaged in ascetic penances. according to the counsel of the gandharva, the paandavas installed dhaumya in the office of their purohita, and became his yaajyas. then they resolved to go to the svayamvara of paancaali .
. yudhishthira told dhaumya that, missing arjuna, he s not like to live longer in the kaamyaka wood, and asked him to tell them of some other dwelling place . dhaumya described to yudhishthira the tirthas, etc of the eastern quarter, then of the south and of suraashtra, then of the west in the country of the avantis, and then of the north .
dhaundhumaara upaakhyaana .
dhautamulaka, a king .
dhenuka2, a tirtha . c, .
dhiroshnin, a vishvadeva .
dhishanaa, name of a female deity . u, .
dhruva1, one of the eight vasus .
dhruva2, son of nahusha .
dhruva3, an ancient rishi .
dhruva4, the polar star . b, .
dhruva5, a paandava warrior .
dhruva6, a kuru warrior .
dhruva7, a rishi .
dhruvadvaara, name of a place. b, .
dhruvaka, a warrior of skanda. u, .
dhruvaratnaa, a maatr. u, .
dhrishnu1, son of manu vaivasvata .
dhrishnu2, son of kavi. b, .
dhrishtadyumna, son of the paancaala king drupada and brother of draupadi อด, อด, อด, . the following synonyms bharatarshabha, q.v. . draupadi, . dronahantri, . paancaala, paancaaladaayaada, paancaalakulavar dhana, paancaalamukhya, paancaalaputra, paan caalaraaja, paancaalaraajan, paancaalatanaya, paan caalya, paancaalyaputra, q.v. paarshata, q.v. yaajnasenasuta, yaajnaseni, q.v.
dhrishtadyumnasuta, pl. . next.
dhrishtadyumnatanuja, pl. . the prec. and next.
dhrishtadyumnaatmaja, pl. . the prec.
dhrishtaketu1, an ancient king .
dhrishtaketu2, king of the cedis, son of shishupaala . g, . also the following synonyms caidya, cedija, cedipa, cedipati, cedipun gava, cediraaj, cediraaja, q.v. shaishupaali, shishupaalasuta, q.v. shishupaalasya...aatmaja, . shishupaalaatmaja, q.v. dashaarhaputraja, .
dhrishtaratha, a king .
dhritaketu, error in c. for dhrishtaketu, q.v.
dhritaraashtra1, son of vyaasa with ambikaa, the wi of vicitravirya . b, . also the following synonyms aajamidha, q.v. ambikaasuta, . aambikeya, . bhaarata, bharatashaardula, bharatashreshtha, bharatarshabha, bharatasattama, q.v. kaurava, kauravashreshtha, kauravaraaja, kauravendra, kauravya, q.v. kurushaardula, kurushreshtha, kurudvaha, kurukulashreshtha, kurukulodvaha, kuru mukhya, kurunandana, kurupravira, kuru pungava, kururaaja, kurusattama, kuru vamshavivardhana, kuruvira, kuruvriddha, kuruvriddhavarya, q.v. vaicitravirya, .
dhritaraashtra2, a serpent king . d dh. is the first of all naagas, .
dhritaraashtra3, a gandharva . b, . gandharva, gandharvaraaj, gandharvaraaja, gandharvaraajan.
dhritaraashtra4, a king, son of the elder janamejaya .
dhritaraashtra5, vaicitraviryi, an ancient king . o, .
dhritaraashtra6, a king. b, .
dhritaraashtra, pl. .
dhritaraashtraja, pl . dhaarta raashtra, pl.
dhritaraashtraputra, pl . dhaarta raashtra, pl.
. enumeration of the children of dhritaraashtra according to the succession of their birth . worthy wives were in time selected for all of them, and dushalaa was given to jayadratha .
dhritaraashtrasunu, pl .
dhritaraashtrasuta1, pl . dhaartaraashtra, pl.
dhritaraashtrasuta2, pl .
dhritaraashtraatmaja, pl . dhaartaraashtra, pl.
. bhishma proposed to marry the two princes to yaadavi, and to the daughter of the gaandhaara king subala, and to the daughter of the madra king. gaandhaari had obtained from shiva the boon that she should have sons. she now was brought to the kurus by her brother shakuni, and given to dhritaraashtra. from love for her future husband she had bandaged her own eyes with cloth .
dhritasena, a kuru warrior .
dhritavarman, a trigarta warrior .
dhritavati, a river .
dhritaayudha, a kuru warrior .
dhriti1 . u, .
dhriti3, a vishvadeva .
dhritimat1, a fire .
dhritimat2, a varsha in kushadvipa .
dhritimati, a river .
dhumavati, a tirtha .
dhumini, wife of ajamidha .
dhumornaa, wife of maarkandeya. b, .
dhumornaa, wife of yama .
dhumra1, a warrior of skanda. u, .
dhumraaksha, a raakshasa .
dhundhu1, an asura, son of madhu and kaitabha. b, . asura.
dhundhu2, an ancient king .
. dhaundumaara upaakhyaana. the great rishi uttanka, in his hermitage in the wilderness, by severe penances for numberless years obtained that vishnu appeared to him, and having been praised by him, granted him that he should always remain virtuous and devoted to vishnu, and that he should obtain a yoga power and urge kuvalaashva, who had been furnished with yoga power from vishnu, to kill the asura dhundhu . after the death of ikshvaaku, shashaada was king in ayodhyaa. list of shashaadas descendants shashaada kakutstha anenas prithu vishvagashva adri yuvanaashva shraava shraavastaka brihadashva kuva laashva, sons. having installed kuvalaashva on the throne, brihadashva retired into the forest as an ascetic. then uttanka asked him first to slay the daitya chief dhundhu, who dwelt underground in the sea ujjaalaka, which was full of sand, in the desert, practised austerities with a view to destroy the gods and the three worlds, brahmaan having granted him that he could not be slain by gods, daityas, raakshasas, yakshas, and gandhervas. every year, when he sleeps covered with sand and begins to breathe, the earth trembles for seven days, and the sand raised by his breath shrouds the sun. he then told him the boon granted by vishnu . they agreed that kuvalaashva should slay the daitya, and brihadashva retired to the forest. asked by yudhishthira, maarkandeya related during the cataclysm, when vishnu, wearing a crown and the kaustubha, and dressed in yellow silk, stretched over many yojanas, lay sleeping on the hood of shesha, who encircled the earth, and a lotus sprang from his navel, and from that lotus brahmaan, who is the four vedas with four faces, the daanavas madhu and kaitabha began to terrify brahmaan. vishnu awoke, and offered to grant them a boon, and as they wished to grant him a boon, he chose that they should be slain by him, and at their request he promised to slay them on a wholly uncovered spot, and that they should become his sons as only his thighs were uncovered, he there cut off their heads with his discus . their son was dhundhu. description of his penances, and the boon he obtained from brahmaan, etc. . when kuvalaashva, with his, sons and his troops, and uttanka set out, and aรซrial voice was heard, the gods showered flowers, etc and the gods, gandharvas, and great rishis came to behold the encounter. at the request of uttanka, vishnu filled kuvalaashva with his own energy. he let his sons excavate the sea of sands in seven days, and then they aroused the daanava, assailing him with arrows, etc. he swallowed the arrows and vomited flames, which consumed all the sons of kuvalaashva, but were extinguished by a stream of water flowing from the body of kuvalaashva, who then burnt him with the brahmaastra, whence he was named dhundhumaara . the gods and great rishis granted him the boon that he should always be able to give wealth to brahmans, etc. then the gods and great rishis went away to their abodes. kuvalaashva had three sons left dridhaashva, kapilaashva, and candraashva, from whom sprang the ikshvaaku kings. blessing upon the reader .
dhurandhara, pl a people .
dhurta1, an ancient king .
dhurtaka, a serpent .
dhutapaapaa, a river .
dhvajin, an ancient king .
dhvajinyutsavasanketa, pl a people . utsava sanketa, pl.
dish, a river .
dishaa . b, .
dishaacakshu, a suparna, the son of garuda .
diggaja, pl. .
digvijaya1 . do adj. .
the of the minor parvans, . arjuna, having obtained his bow, etc prevailed upon yudhishthira to let him subdue the north. arjuna set out on the celestial chariot which he had obtained from agni, and subdued the north, while bhimasena subjugated the east, sahadeva the south, and nakula the west, and yudhishthira stayed within khaandavaprastha . the campaign of arjuna is narrated in full . full description of bhimasenas campaign towards the east . full narration of sahadevas campaign towards the south . a, v. sahadeva b, v. maahishmati . a, v. saha deva b, v. agni . v. sahadeva . full description of the campaign of nakula towards the west .
dilipa1, an ancient king, the father of bhagiratha . . ailavila performed sacrifices at his sacrifices the road was made of gold. the gods, headed by indra, regarded him as dharma himself, and used to come to him when he fought on the water his two wheels never sank in. those who saw him attained to heaven, . b, . b, . ailavila, khatvaanga.
dilipa2, a serpent .
dimbhaka, a follower of jaraasandha .
dindika, a mouse .
dipaka, a suparna, the son of garuda .
diptaketu, an ancient king .
diptaaksha, pl a people .
diptaroman, a vishvadeva .
dipti, a vishvadeva .
diptoda, a tirtha . bhrigos tirtha.
dirgha1, a maagadha king .
dirghabaahu, son of dhritaraashtra .
dirghajihva, an asura, son of danu .
dirghajihvaa, a raakshasi .
dirghajihvaa, a maatri. u, .
dirghalocana, son of dhritaraashtra . next.
dirghaprajna, a king . dirghayajna.
dirgharoma, son of dhritaraashtra .
dirghasattra, a tirtha .
dirghatamas, a rishi. bhishma continued the rishi utathya had a wife named mamataa his younger brother brihaspati, the purohita of the gods, approached mamataa, who by utathya was pregnant with a child, who even while being in his mothers womb had studied the vedas and the six angas. the embryo kicked him out with his foot, and the semen fell upon the earth. brihaspati cursed him so he was born blind, and came to be called dirghatamas . the wife of dirghatamas was a braahmani, pradveshi by name. with her he begat gautama and other sons and he, who knew the vedas and angas, having learnt the godharma from saurabheya began to practise it. he therefore was excluded by the rishis from the asylum, and accosted in harsh words by his wife, who said that she would no more support him and his children. dirghatamas then established the rule that from that day every woman should have to adhere to one husband for life, whether he were dead or alive, etc. she then caused her sons to tie him on a raft and throw him into the gangaa. drifting along, he passed through the territories of many kings, until he was taken up by king bali, who wanted him to raise up offspring. but balis queen sudeshnaa, who saw that he was blind, sent a shudra woman in her stead, who was her nurse, with whom the rishi begat eleven sons, kaakshivat, etc. as these sons were his own and not balis, bali sent sudeshnaa to him, and dirghatamas, after merely touching her person, told her thou shalt have five children named anga, vanga, kalinga, pundra, and suhma. their inions have come to be called after their names, . b, . autathya, gotama, utathyaputra.
dirghavenu, pl a people .
dirghayajna, king of ayodhyaa . dirghaprajna.
dirghaayus, son of ashyutaayus .
diti, the daughter of daksha, the wife of kashyapa and mother of the daityas . b, . b, . g, .
ditija, pl. = daitya, pl .
divaakara1, a suparna, the son of garuda .
divaukasaam pushkarini, a tirtha .
diviratha1, the son of bhumanyu .
diviratha2, the son of dadhivaahana. b, .
divodaasa, king of the kaashis, son of bhimasena or sudeva . b, . bhaimaseni, kaashisha, saudeva, sudevatanaya.
divyakarmakrit, a vishvadeva .
divyakata, a city .
divyasunu, a vishvadeva .
draunaputra, v. dronaputra.
draupadeya, pl the five sons of the paandavas and draupadi อด, อด, .
draupadeya, dual .
draupadeya1, sg .
draupadi, the wife of the paandavas . madhu sudani, sutasomamaatri.
. while duryodhana, dushaasana, karna, and shakuni were longing to harm the paandavas, durvaasas arrived with, disciples, and harassed duryodhana with his whimsical and insolent behaviour but as duryodhana was neither angered nor annoyed, he granted him a boon. according to what had been agreed upon between himself and karna and dushaasana, duryodhana asked durvaasas to visit the paandavas with his disciples, when draupadi, after having regaled the brahmans, etc with food, would have gone to rest. durvaasas promised to so . then durvaasas one day came to the paandavas with, disciples, when the meal was over and krishnaa was reposing. krishnaa then praised krishna, who, leaving rukmini, who was sleeping by his side, came to her and demanded something to eat. draupadi became embarrassed, because the sun given vessel only remained full till she had finished her meal, and therefore now was empty. at the request of krishna she, however, fetched the vessel, and krishna found a particle of rice and vegetable sticking at its rim, and swallowing it he said to her may it please the god who is the soul of the universe, and may the partaker of sacrifices be satisfied. then he ordered bhima to invite the munis to dinner. meanwhile those ascetics, having bathed in the river, observed that their stomachs were full, and as durvaasas feared that the paandavas would destroy them, looking n upon them with angry eyes, because the repast had been uselessly prepared for them, they all ran away, so that bhima sought for them in vain. as the paandavas were afraid that the munis might return at night and curse them, krishna suddenly appeared and consoled them. then he repaired to his capital . one day when the paandavas had gone a hunting, leaving draupadi in the hermitage with the permission of the great rishi trinabindu and of dhaumya, the king of sindhu, jayadratha vaarddhakshattri, who, with a view of matrimony, was on his way to the king of the shaalveyas, halted in the wood of kaamyaka, and seeing draupadi standing at the threshold of the hermitage, he fell in love with her, and sent king kotikaasya to inquire who she was . kotikaasya introduced himself to draupadi and showed her the trigarta king kshemankara, and the son of the king of the kulindas, and the son of subala of the race of ikshvaaku he said that jayadratha was there at the head of, chariots, etc followed by twelve sauvira princes as his standard bearers, and his brothers . draupadi told kotikaasya who she was, and that her husbands were out a hunting, and invited them to alight and await the return of the paandavas . kotikaasya told jayadratha the words of draupadi, and exhorted him to take her with him to the sauviras. jayadratha introduced himself to draupadi, who offered him water for washing his feet, and promised him fifty animals for breakfast and various kinds of deer, etc etc when yudhishthira returned. jayadratha asked her to leave the miserable paandavas and become his wife, but was severely rebuked by draupadi, who threatened him with the paandavas. as jayadratha said, we too belong by birth to the seventeen high clans, and look n upon the paandavas, she threatened him with krishna and arjuna, and the andhakas, vrishnis, and kaikeyas, and called upon dhaumya. jayadratha seized her by her upper garment draupadi pushed him so that he fell upon the ground but at last she was obliged to ascend his chariot, while dhaumya followed amidst jayadrathas infantry . when the paandavas again met, yudhishthira knew from the shrill cries of the birds that the forest had been invaded by hostile intruders, and he caused them to give up the chase and drive home on their great chariots drawn by saindhava horses. a yellow jackal on their left indicated the violence e. indrasena learned what had happened from the weeping foster sister of draupadi, and then they pursued and overtook jayadratha, who was greatly alarmed . draupadi, asked by jayadratha, pointed out to him each of the five paandavas, and advised him to throw n his arms and seek the protection of yudhishthira, at the top of whose flagstaff two tabours called nanda and upananda are constantly played. the paandavas, leaving the panic stricken infantry alone, rushed upon the charioteers . bhima with his iron mace, embossed with gold, rushed towards jayadratha, who was defended by kotikaasya. the trigarta king, who had killed the four steeds of yudhishthira with his mace, was himself killed by yudhishthira, who then, together with indrasena, mounted the chariot of sahadeva. nakula killed kshemankara and mahaamukha, and was compelled by the trigarta king suratha to mount bhimas chariot. bhima put kotikaasya to flight and slew him. arjuna killed the twelve sauvira heroes, etc. jayadratha put draupadi n and fled. yudhishthira, seeing draupadi and dhaumya walking in front, caused her to be taken up on the chariot of sahadeva. arjuna advised bhima to refrain from slaying the remnant of the saindhava host. bhima prevailed upon yudhishthira to return to the hermitage with the twins and draupadi and dhaumya, while he himself would find out and slay jayadratha. yudhishthira entreated him not to slay him, remembering dushalaa and gaandhaari but draupadi indignantly required that he should be slain, and bhima and arjuna went in search of him. in the hermitage yudhishthira found maarkandeya and many other brahmans and ascetics, who were greatly bewailing the lot of draupadi. meanwhile arjuna killed the horses of jayadratha, though they were a full krosha ahead of him. jayadratha was then overtaken by bhima, but arjuna entreated bhima not to kill him .
draupadija, pl. = draupadeya, pl .
. while they were conversing in the evening, filled with sorrow, krishnaa, who wondered at the hardheartedness of duryodhana, karna, shakuni, and dushaasana, who were the only four that did not shed tears at their being exiled, and who lamented their present state so different from their former happiness, tried to excite yudhishthira to revenge himself . draupadi related the old story of the conversation between prahlaada and his grandson bali vairocana, in which prahlaada told bali that neither might nor forgiveness is invariably meritorious, and then she said therefore consider, o king that time has come for thee to put forth thy might . yudhishthira maintained that a wise man should ever forgive his persecutor that wrath has been given to man for the destruction of the world and cited gaathaas of the forgiving kaashyapa forgiveness is virtue, sacrifice, the vedas, etc. men of forgiveness obtain regions in the brahmaloka when one forgives everything, then he becomes braahman this and the other world belongs to him who forgives, etc. . from the fact that pious persons are often unhappy and vicious persons happy, draupadi concludes that dhaatri and vidhaatri have clouded yudhishthiras senses, that it is folly to aspire to final emancipation, that the consequences of acts are inevitable, that god makes creatures to work as a wooden l is made to move its limbs by a wire puller, etc and causes them to destroy each other, that god s not behave towards his creatures like a father or mother, but like a vicious person either god is sinful, or might is the true cause of acts, and then those are to be pitied that have no might . yudhishthira censured krishnaa for her atheism, saying that one should not act virtuously from the desire of reaping fruits, but because it is ordained so by the veda, the ancient religion revealed by the rishis, and because it is the conduct of the good and wise neither should one bt virtue or religion nor censure god, by whose grace mortal man, by piety, acquires immortality. for though we may not see the results, being mysterious even to the gods, and the illusion of the gods is mysterious to us, yet virtue and vice are not fruitless, as may be seen from the examples of vyaasa, vasishtha, maitreya, naarada, lomasha, shuka, and other rishis, who by virtue have become superior even to the gods as also from her own and dhrishtadyumnas birth nor would men have practised virtue, generation after generation, if asceticism, etc were useless, and no one would pursue salvation, but they would live like beasts, and why should rishis, gods, gandharvas, raakshasas, and asuras, who are above human conditions, cherish virtue he who, trusting the proofs of his own reasoning, rejects other authority or bts religion and virtue, loses this and yonder world, and is lower than even shudras and robbers . krishnaa said that she did not slander religion nor disregard god it was affliction that had extorted these words from her. she maintained that besides what a man obtains from necessity, fate, accident, and deeds in a former life, which god distributes, there are also things of which man himself is the cause, working through his own intelligence and exertion. it is by exertion that all creatures live, even dhaatri and vidhaatri, as well as the crane on the water. those who believe only in destiny or necessity are both the meanest among men. on the other hand, if god were not the giver of good and bad fruits, there would not be any creature that was miserable, and all exertions would be successful. manu himself declares that a man should act and if he works, even if he be not successful, his debt is cancelled. having exerted thyself, thou wilt know what the fruit of thy exertions will be. the tiller tills the soil with the plough, and sows the seed thereon he then sits silent, for the clouds are now the cause and if no rain favours him, the tiller is without blame...if, however, no exertion is made, there can be no success...all this, uttered by brihaspati himself, a learned brahman said to my father and my brothers from them heard it . bhima tried to prevail upon yudhishthira that he should make war with the dhaarta raashtras, aided by the srinjayas and kaikeyas and krishna, maintaining that a man should practise virtue for the sake of gaining wealth, and acquire wealth for the sake of pleasure, but neither for its own sake that might and energy constitute the virtue of the kshatriya, and that deviation from the virtues of ones own order is never laudable that the asuras, though elder brothers in possession of power and abundance, were all vanquished by the gods through stratagem that as wealth should be spent by one who wishes to increase his wealth, just as seeds are scattered on the ground, thus a person who throws away a little of his virtue like seeds in order to gain a larger measure of virtue is regarded as wise, and that whatever sin a monarch commits in acquiring inion, he cancels it all afterwards by sacrifices and by bestowing villages, etc on brahmans . yudhishthira declared that he was unable to violate the pledge, and that it was now too late for bhima to use harsh words . bhima said that only he whose life is unlimited, or who knows what the period of his life is, has time to wait they ought to strive for the possession of the king before they died if a man, slaying his injurer, goes the very day into hell, that hell becomes heaven to him the pain one feels in having to suppress his wrath is more burning than fire itself...thou art kind like a brahman, how hast thou been born in the kshatriya order those who are born in this order are generally of cruel hearts thou hast heard the duties of kings, as promulgated by manu, cruel and fraught with crookedness and opposed to tranquillity moreover, we will not be able to live unknown, as we are known all over the world, and many kings, who have been expelled by us from their kings, and robbed and exiled by us, will assist duryodhana and set against us numerous spies in disguise we have now lived in the woods for thirteen months, which may be regarded as so many years, as putikas are a substitute for the soma or one may free himself from this sin by offering food to a bull .
draupadiputra, pl. = draupadeya, pl .
. distressed and thinking of revenging himself on drona, not contented with his children and relatives, king drupada wandered along the yamunaa and the gangaa and came to a hermitage of brahmans, and prevailed upon yaaja to perform a sacrifice for him, assisted by his brother upayaaja, in order to obtain a son who might slay drona. then yaaja summoned the queen, but she said that she was not fit for accepting the offspring, her mouth being unclean and her person perfumed. yaaja replied since the sacrifice has been prepared by yaaja and sanctified by upayaajas invocations, it shall produce its effect whether thou comest or waitest. then arose from the flames a boy with a crown on his head, his body being arrayed in excellent armour, sword in hand and carrying a bow and arrows, sending forth loud roars, and immediately ascending a chariot. a great invisible being in the skies said that he would destroy drona, etc. after this paancaali arose from the centre of the vedi, and a voice, not coming from a visible body, said that she would be the cause of the destruction of many kshatriyas. at the birth of both children the paancaalas shouted with joy. the queen was regarded as their mother. then the brahmans gave to the boy the name of dhrishtadyumna, on account of his audacity, etc and to the girl that of krishnaa, on account of her dark complexion . drona brought dhrishtadyumna to his own abode, and taught him the use of all weapons, considering that destiny is inevitable .
. after the brahmans and paandavas had taken their seats, draupadi and satyabhaamaa saatraajiti, the favourite wife of krishna, entered the hermitage. satyabhaamaa asked draupadi how she made the paandavas obedient to her, in order that she herself might by the same means secure the affection of krishna. draupadi warned her against using drugs, incantations, etc which were used by wicked women, and said that she kept aloof from vanity and served the paandavas with devotion, etc. formerly, in the palace of yudhishthira at indraprastha, food was daily given to, brahmans, snaatakas with thirty serving maids assigned to each, yatis he had, well dressed serving maids with bracelets, etc all skilled in singing and dancing, maidservants who day and night used to feed guests, horses, and, elephants. and it was draupadi who had the supervision of all this she knew the names and features of all the girls, and knew everything about them, and even about the cowherds and shepherds. she alone knew the income and expenditure of the king and what their whole wealth was, bearing hunger and thirst, and being the first to wake up and the last to go to bed . draupadi said that for women there is no god equal to the husband, as it is from him the wife obtains offspring, articles of enjoyment, fame, and heaven itself hereafter. in order to attract the heart of krishna, satyabhaamaa ought to let him understand that she aed him with all her heart by promptly, when she saw him enter her chamber, offering him a seat and water to wash his feet and even if he ordered a maidservant to anything, she ought to get up and it herself not to blab of whatever he should speak before her feed those that were dear to him, and keep herself aloof from those that were hostile to him not to stay or converse in private even with her sons pradyumna and shaamba and shun wicked women . then krishna bade farewell to the paandavas and to maarkandeya, etc and called for satyabhaamaa. satyabhaamaa comforted draupadi, saying that she would soon recover her ancient happiness, and relating of prativindhya, shrutasoma, and shrutakarman, and shataanika, and shrutasena, that they were well and skilled in weapons and, like abhimanyu, delighted with staying at dvaaravati, and were loved by subhadraa, pradyumna, krishna, with his son bhaanu, etc and her mother in law, and all the andhakas and vrishnis, with raama, etc. then satyabhaamaa mounted the chariot of krishna and they set out for his city .
draupadi satyabhaamayo samvaada .
draupadisuta, pl. = draupadeya, pl .
dravida, pl a people . c, . next.
dravina, son of the vasu dhara .
drona, the preceptor of the dhaartaraashtras and the paandavas, dhrishtadyumna, etc son of bharadvaaja, husband of kripi, and father of ashvatthaaman . bhishma prevailed upon . to accept the paandavas and the kauravas as his pupils in the dhanurveda, . janamejaya said tell me about the birth of drona and of his son ashvatthaaman. vaishampaayana said the rishi bharadvaaja who dwelt at gangaadvaara one day saw the apsaras ghritaaci coming from her bath then his seed came out, but was preserved by him in a vessel from that seed sprang who studied the vedas and the vedaangas. bharadvaaja had taught agnivesha the use of the aagneya weapon, and the muni who had sprung from fire now taught it to . . was a friend of drupada . drona remained in the hermitage of his father and practised austerities. with kripi shaaradvati he had the son ashvatthaaman . . studied the dhanurveda. about this time raama jaamadagnya desired to distribute his wealth among the brahmans, and drona with his disciples set out for the mountain mahendra to have his share in the wealth and learn from raama the dhanurveda, the use of celestial weapons, and the nitishaastra. when he arrived, raama had already given his wealth to the brahmans and the earth to kashyapa he then asked . to choose either his body or his weapons. drona accepted the weapons and the dhanurveda, and then repaired to drupada, . as drupada rebuked him for calling him his friend, filled with wrath, went to haastinapura, where he for some time lived privately in the house of kripa, while ashvatthaaman, being unknown, taught the paarthas the use of arms. one when . had by means of blades of grass, which were consecrated by mantras, recovered a ball which the princes had lost in a well, and, by means of an arrow, his ring which he had thrown into the well, he was called to bhishma, whom he told that he had applied to drupada in order to obtain milk for ashvatthaaman, but had been rebuked by him. bhishma asked . to make the princes accomplished in arms, . bhishma presented . with a pretty house, etc and gave the dhaartaraashtras and the paandavas to him as his pupils. arjuna became the foremost of .s pupils, even superior to ashvatthaaman . also the vrishnis and the andhakas and princes from various countries became his pupils. even karna came to learn the dhanurveda he supported by duryodhana, frequently defied arjuna, . the foremost pupils of drona were duryodhana, bhimasena, ashvatthaaman, nakula and sahadeva, yudhishthira, and arjuna . the dhaartaraashtras became very jealous of bhima and arjuna, . one day . caused an artificial bird to be placed on the top of a tree, and first repeatedly asked yudhishthira, when he stood aiming at the bird, what he did see. he answered that he saw the tree, his brothers, and the bird. . reproachingly told him to stand apart. then . repeated the experiment with his other pupils with the same result . at last arjunas turn came he said first that he saw only the vulture, and then that he saw only its head, and when . gave the order he struck off the head of the bird with his shaft, . arjuna rescued the life of . by shooting with five arrows an alligator in the gangaa, which had seized the thigh of . . gave arjuna the weapon brahmashiras on condition that he should not use it against a human foe, as it might consume the whole universe, . c, . c, อด, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms aacaarya, aacaaryamukhya, q.v. bhaaradvaaja, bharadvaajasuta, bharadvaajaat maja, q.v. bhaarataacaarya, q.v. shonaashva, . shonaa shvavaaha, . shonahaya, . guru, q.v. rukmaratha, .
drona2, a shaarngaka, a son of mandapaala and jaritaa .
drona3, a mountain. b, .
. janamejaya enquired of the state of dhritaraashtra on the receipt of intelligence of bhishmas death. vaishampaayanas answer dhritaraashtra asked sanjaya about what the kauravas did after the fall of bhishma. sanjaya mentioned the arrow pillow, etc and that the warriors once more went to battle. the kurus desired to make karna their generalissimo . karna eulogised bhishma, and promised to be their leader, men tioning the prowess of yudhishthira, etc. he commanded his charioteer to make his chariot ready . karna waited upon bhishma . bhishma, mentioning karnas prowess against the kaambojas, etc urged him to fight for the victory of duryodhana. then karna saluted bhishma, and, at his return, was worshipped by duryodhana and the kauravas . duryodhana asked karnas advice as to who should become the general issimo of the kuru army. karna proposed drona . duryodhana requested drona to take the command . drona, mentioning his knowledge of the veda and the shaiva weapon, etc and his inability to slay dhrishtadyumna, accepted the request. duryodhana and the kings performed the inauguration of drona, at which the army rejoiced. drona arrayed the troops the sindhu king, etc in the right wing, supported by shakuni, etc. kripa, etc in the left wing, supported by the kaambojas, etc. the madras, etc in the rear karna at the head of all the bowmen. the array was in the form of a shakata. yudhishthira disposed his troops in the form of a kraunca, with krishna and arjuna at the head. omens appeared when drona proceeded to battle. the paandavas and srinjayas were broken by drona. dhrishtadyumna drona . yudhishthira urged dhrishtadyumna and arjuna to check drona. the kekaya princes, etc achieved diverse feats. drona put the paandava troops to rout. drona the kekaya princes, etc. . at last drona, having slain more than two akshauhinis, proceeded hence to heaven slain by dhrishtadyumna. p etc beheld him . dhritaraashtra asked sanjaya the particulars of dronas heroism and slaughter . dhritaraashtra swooned away, and was restored to consciousness by the bharata ladies. then he enquired of sanjaya about yudhishthira, etc especially yuyudhaana saatyaki, and dhrishtaketu, and ketumat and the children of dhrishtadyumna, kshatranjaya, etc who, giving up all sports for twelve years, and observing excellent vows, waited upon bhishma for the sake of weapons and the five kaikeya brothers and yuyutsu, and dhrishta dyumna . dhritaraashtra recited the feats of krishna the killing of hayaraaja, etc that he had vanquished in battle the angas, etc and that if krishna would summon them, gada, etc would take up their position in the paandava host and regretted that duryodhana did not know krishna and arjuna the destruction of the kurus he attributed to himself or to destiny . sanjaya begins his narrative in detail. the eleventh days battle duryodhana, having consulted with karna and dushaasana, etc asked drona to seize yudhishthira alive. drona became very glad because duryodhana had not asked him to slay yudhishthira. duryodhana explained that if yudhishthira were slain, the other paandavas, who were invincible, would avenge him but taken alive, he might be once more van quished at dice, and so all the paandavas be obliged once more to go to the woods. drona said that he would seize yudhi shthira if not protected by arjuna arjuna, therefore, must be with drawn from yudhishthira. duryodhana proclaimed the promise of drona to all his troops, in order to make him stick to his promise . yudhishthira learned through his spies that drona had promised to seize him, and addressed his brothers and allies arjuna consoled him. a fierce battle commenced. protected by drona and arjuna, both hosts seemed to stand inactive. the paandavas could not withstand drona, who began to consume the division of dhrishtadyumna . drona caused a river of blood to flow there. yudhishthira drona shakuni sahadeva drona dhrishta dyumna bhimasena vivimshati shalya nakula dhrishta ketu kripa saatyaki kritavarman senaapati susharman viraata karna drupada bhagadatta bhurishravas shikhandin ghatotkaca alambusha shekitaana anuvinda lakshmana kshatradeva paurava abhi manyu paurava was rescued by kritavarman, and then by jayadratha abhimanyu jaya dratha, who was vanquished shalya abhimanyu viraata, etc praised abhimanyu dhritaraashtras sons shalya abhimanyu bhimasena abhimanyu shalya bhimasena shalya both fell n kritavarman took shalya away on his chariot the paandavas vanquished the dhaartaraashtras . karnas son vrishasena attacked the paandava army nakulas son shataanika vrishasena the draupadeyaa the paandavas vrishasena ashvatthaaman, etc. especially bhima, etc. . the kuru army was broken. drona yudhishthira the paancaala prince kumaara drona drona shikhandin, etc. drona caused yugandhara to fall n from the seat of his chariot viraata, etc drona vyaaghradatta drona simhasena drona, who slew both simhasena and vyaaghradatta arjuna, in order to rescue yudhishthira, attacked dronas division. just then the sun set. drona and duryo dhana, etc withdrew their troops, and so did arjuna. the paandavas, etc praised arjuna .
dronasharmapada, a tirtha. b, .
dronaparvan, the seventh book of mhbhr . c, .
. continuation of the night after the fourteenth day according to the words of vyaasa, yudhishthira refrained from himself seeking to slay karna, but was filled with grief and anger because karna had slain ghatotkaca. beholding the kurus held in check by bhima, he told dhrishtadyumna, etc to attack drona, who received them duryodhana, etc came to dronas rescue a fierce battle ensued between the two hosts both armies became sorely afflicted with fatigue and blind with sleep. arjuna granted permission to the warriors to sleep. ri and the soldiers applauded arjuna the kurus asked karna and duryodhana to abstain from the fight all the combatants laid themselves n on the field to sleep the kaurava troops blessed arjuna for his act of kindness. when the moon rose, both hosts, rising from sleep, again prepared for battle . duryodhana taxed drona wrathfully for his kindness to the paandavas drona in wrath promised to slay all the paancaalas, and described the measure of arjunas might and prowess . duryodhana vowed that he, etc that very day would slay arjuna, dividing the bharata host into two divisions. drona ridiculed duryodhana, saying that it was only right that duryodhana or shakuni, who were the root of the hostility, should proceed against arjuna, instead of causing all the unoffending kshatriyas to be slain, and that he should accomplish his boasting vow before dhrita raashtra, and that he and karna and dushaasana would slay the paandavas moreover, he had e all in life that one should the army then was divided into two bodies, and the battle commenced . the fifteenth day when three quarters of that night had worn away, the battle once more commenced. at sunrise both hosts, alighting from their chariots, etc uttered the prayers of the twilight. after the kuru army had been divided into two bodies, drona, with duryodhana before him, proceeded against the somakas, the paandavas, and the paancaalas. urged by krishna, arjuna moved to the left of drona and karna. bhima urged arjuna to put forth all his vigour. arjuna drona karna, etc. . drona moved away towards the north the paandava troops began to tremble the paancaalas drona drupada and viraata the three grandsons of drupada the cedis drona, who slew the three grandsons of drupada, vanquished the cedis, etc and slew drupada and viraata. dhrishtadyumna swore to slay drona that very day drupada with his division arjuna drona duryo dhana, etc. bhima urged dhrishtadyumna, and they both attacked dronas division soon the morning sun arose . the warriors aed the sun, as he rose, and the battle once more commenced neither karna, etc could be seen for dust. duryodhana, etc engaged in battle with four of the paandava warriors duryodhana his brothers nakula and sahadeva karna bhima drona arjuna nakula was worsted by duryo dhana sahadeva slew dushaasanas driver dushaasana was worsted by sahadeva bhima jumped into the chariot of nakula drona invoked the aindra, etc weapons g ri si aps y and raa. applauded drona and arjuna, saying that this is no human, etc but a high braahma encounter both employed the braahma weapon the engagement became general . dushaasana dhrishtadyumna, who vanquished him and proceeded against drona. kritavarman three of his brothers dhrishta dyumna nakula and sahadeva, who checked them dhrishtadyumna proceeded towards drona. dhrishtadyumna saatyaki drona duryodhana duryodhana was worsted by saatyaki karna rushed to the rescue of duryodhana bhima rushed towards karna. yudhishthira urged his warriors to rush to the rescue of saatyaki, bhima, and the twins arjuna attacked the kurus, and drona attacked the paancaalas . drona caused a great carnage among the paancaalas the paancaalas and srinjayas drona the paandavas feared, thinking that arjuna would not fight with drona. krishna told arjuna to aban virtue and let some man tell drona that ashvatthaaman had been slain in battle. arjuna did not approve of it others approved of it, but yudhishthira with great difficulty. bhima slew with a mace an elephant named ashvatthaaman belonging to the maalava chief indravarman, and exclaimed before drona ashvatthaaman has been slain. drona did not believe bhima, but attacked dhrishtadyumna and slew the paancaalas with the braahma weapon, and cut off the head of vasudaana, and slew matsyas, etc. the ri. vishvaamitra, etc etc appeared in the welkin and reproved drona for using the braahma weapon against persons not acquainted with it, and called upon drona to lay aside his weapons and leave the earth soon. drona asked yudhishthira whether the report about ashvatthaa mans death was true krishna urged yudhishthra to save his army by an untruth bhima urged him to the same yudhishthira distinctly said that ashvatthaaman was dead, adding indistinctly the word elephant before this yudhi shthiras chariot had stayed at a height of four fingers breadth from the surface of the earth after this untruth his animals touched the earth. drona became quite dejected, also after the words of the ri and beholding dhrishtadyumna before him, could not fight as before . dhrishta dyumna drona the celestial weapons no longer appeared at dronas bidding his weapons, that had not been exhausted for four days and one night, now became exhausted on the third part of the fifth day. drona took up another celestial bow which angiras had given him a fierce encounter took place between drona and dhrishtadyumna none else had arrows of that kind that drona used in close fight except kripa, etc. saatyaki rescued dhrishtadyumna and was applauded by krishna and arjuna, and the si etc. . duryodhana, karna, and kripa dhritaraashtras sons saatyaki yudhishthira, etc. yudhishthira urged his troops against drona, who again used the braahma weapon bhima took up dhrishtadyumna on his own chariot, and urged him to slay drona quickly both dhrishtadyumna and drona invoked the braahma weapon, etc. dhrishtadyumna began to slay the vashaatis, etc. bhima again reminded drona of ashvatthaamans death, calling upon karna, kripa, and duryodhana to exert carefully in battle. drona laid his weapons aside, devoted himself to yoga, and proceeded to heaven in the company of the foremost of ri in a blaze of light, that only sanjaya, etc saw dhrishtadyumna cut off dronas head though for bidden by arjuna and blamed by everybody and threw it n amongst the kurus, who ran away in all directions, except ashvatthaaman. sanjaya, through the grace of vyaasa, beheld dronas proceeding after he had ascended the sky. the kurus, the paandavas, and the srinjayas all became dejected and ran away bhimasena and dhrishtadyumna embraced each other, bhimasena expecting the slaughter of karna and duryodhana .
dronaayani, v. draunaayani.
droni, v. drauni.
druhyu1, son of yayaati and sharmishthaa . b, .
druhyu2, son of matinaara .
druma1, an ancient king .
druma2, a prince .
druma3, king of the kimpurushas . d, .
drumada, a rishi .
drumaputra, king of the kimpurushas . druma.
drumasena, a prince .
drupada, king of the paancaalas, son of prishata, father of dhrishtadyumna, shikhandin, draupadi, etc . son of prishata, the friend of bharadvaaja, used every day to come to the hermitage to play and study together with drona. after the death of prishata, . became king of the northern paancaalas. about the same time bharadvaaja also ascended to heaven, . also the following synonyms dhrishtadyumnapitri, q.v. paancaala, paancaalanripa, paancaalapati, paancaala raaja, paancaalya, q.v. paarshata, prishataatmaja, q.v. saumaki, q.v. yajnasena, .
. drona now one day asked the dhaarta raashtras and paandavas for his fee as their instructor, saying seize ye the paancaala king drupada in battle and bring him to me. duryodhana, karna, yuyutsu, dushaasana, vikarna, jalasandha, sulocana, subaahu, dirghalocana, etc smote the paancaalas and conquered the capital of drupada, while arjuna, etc waited outside the town at a distance of half a krosha, thinking that the others were not able to seize drupada. defeated by drupada, they fell back upon the paandavas. arjuna, bidding yudhishthira not to engage in the fight, appointed the sons of maadri his cakrarakshas, while bhimasena, mace in hand, ran ahead to slay the elephants, while arjuna attacked the paancaalas and srinjayas and felled drupada from his elephant. drupada and satyajit rushed at arjuna. satyajit had his bows repeatedly cut in twain and his horses, etc slain, and desisted from the fight. drupada also had his bow cut in twain, etc by arjuna, who then took a scimitar and, leaping from his own chariot upon that of his foe, seized drupada, while the paancaalas ran away. bhima, etc began to lay waste his capital, but were prevented by arjuna. drona prevailed upon drupada to accept his friendship, and restored half his king to him, viz that part of it that lay on the southern side of the bhaagirathi, with the southern paancaalas, up to the banks of the carmanvati river, where drupada thenceforth resided sorrowfully in kaampilya in maakandi, on the banks of gangaa, while drona retained that half that lay to the north of the bhaagirathi, and thenceforth continued to reside in ahicchatra .
drupadaduhitriputra, pl. = draupadeya, pl .
drupadaputra, pl. อด, . drupadasuta, pl drupadaatmaja, pl.
drupadasuta, pl. .
drupadaatmaja, pl. . drupada putra, pl.
dridha1, son of dhritaraashtra . dridhahasta, dridhakshatra, dridhasandha, dridhavarman, dridhaayudha.
dridhaashva, son of kuvalaashva .
dridhadhanvan, a prince .
dridhahasta, a son of dhritaraashtra . dridha1.
dridhakshatra, a son of dhritaraashtra . dridha1.
dridharatha1, a son of dhritaraashtra . dridhara thaashraya.
dridharatha2, an ancient king .
dridharathaashraya, a son of dhritaraashtra . dridharatha1.
dridhasandha, a son of dhritaraashtra . dridha1.
dridhasena, a paandava warrior .
dridhasyu, a rishi, son of agastya and lopaamudraa .
dridhavarman, a son of dhritaraashtra . dridha1.
dridhavrata, a rishi . dridhavya, dridhaayu3.
dridhavya, a rishi . dridhavrata, dridhaayu2.
dridhaayu, son of pururavas and urvashi .
dridhaayu, a king .
dridhaayu, a rishi . dridhavrata, dridhavya.
dridhaayudha, a son of dhritaraashtra . dridha1.
dridheshudhi, an ancient king .
dridheyu, a rishi .
drishadvat, a prince .
drishadvati, a river . b, . m, .
drishtipa, pl a class of gods .
dushala, a son of dhritaraashtra .
dushalaa, daughter of dhritaraashtra and gaandhari .
. that gaandhaari also had a daughter was due to the circumstance that vyaasa, when he divided the lump of flesh, assigned one part in excess of the hundred to become a daughter .
dushaasana, a son of dhritaraashtra อด, อด, . bhaarata, bharatashreshtha, bhaarataapasada, dhritaraashtraja, kaurava, kauravya, kurushaardula.
dusaha1, son of dhritaraashtra .
duliduha, an ancient king .
dundubhi2, an asura . g, .
dundubhi, a female gandharva .
dundubhisvaana, a region in krauncadvipa .
duraadhana, a son of dhritariaashtra . next.
duraadhara, a son of dhritaraashtra . the prec.
duraasada, a prince .
durdhara1, a son of dhritaraashtra .
durdharsha1, a son of dhritaraashtra . durdharshana.
durdharshana, a son of dhritaraashtra .
durgaa, a goddess, the same as umaa . f yudhishthira praises . with the hymn, vv . for the names occurring in the two hymns v. the synonyms enumerated under the heading umaa.
durgaa, name of two rivers .
durgashaila, a mountain in shaakadvipa. b, .
durgala, pl a people .
durjaya1, an asura .
durjaya2, son of shaaradandaayani. c, .
durjaya3, son of dhritaraashtra . kuruvardhana.
durjaya4, a king .
durjayaa, name of a place .
durmada, son of dhritaraashtra .
durmarshana1, son of dhritaraashtra .
durmukha1, son of dhritaraashtra . kaurava, kurumukhya.
durmukha2, a king .
durmukha3, an asura .
durmukha4, a paandava warrior .
durmukha6, a serpent .
dururduda, error in c. for dardura, q.v.
durvaarana2 or durvaari, pl name of a tribe among the kaambojas .
durvaasas1, a rishi . b, . c krishna said put up in my house the brahman durvaasas, who was green and tawny, clad in rags, who had a stick of bilva, a long beard, who was emaciated, taller than the tallest men he wandered over all the celestial and human worlds, singing this verse at congregations and in public squares who would cause the brahman . to dwell in his house he becomes enraged with everyone even at the slightest transgression he that would give me shelter should not anger me. as no one took notice of him, invited him. sometimes he would eat food sufficient for many thousand persons, sometimes very little, and he would not return home he would laugh and weep without any visible reason no one at that time was equal to him in years he burnt all the beds and coverlets and all the well aned damsels, and then went out then he asked for rice milk having previously caused every kind of food and drink to be kept ready, caused hot rice milk to be brought having eaten some, he ordered me to smear my limbs with the remnant, which did then he smeared rukmini, and causing her to be yoked to a chariot, he, ascending that chariot, set out of my house, striking her with the hook, and proceeded along the high road the daasharhas became angry as rukmini tottered, he struck her then he leapt n from the chariot and fled towards the south on foot, followed by us. then he became gratified because had subdued my anger, and said as long as gods and men will continue to entertain a liking for food, so long will everyone among them cherish the same liking for thee so long as there will be righteous in the worlds, so long will thy fame last agreeable thou shalt be to all persons whatever articles of thine have been broken or burnt or destroyed, thou shalt see restored or even better thou wilt have no fear of death through such parts of thy body as have been smeared thou ought to have smeared also the soles of thy feet. saw my body endued with great beauty and splenr. he also blessed rukmini, saying thou shalt be the foremost of women in fame, etc free from decrepitude or diseases or loss of complexion, possessed of a fragrant or, the foremost of krishnas, wives, and thou shalt dwell in the same world as krishna. having recommended me to be always thus disposed towards the brahmans, he disappeared. and rukmini took the vow of always satisfying the brahmans. having entered our house, saw that everything which . had broken or burnt had become renewed. from that day forth have always worshipped the brahmans, . d, . atreya .
durvibhaaga, pl a people .
durvigaaha, a son of dhritaraashtra .
durvimocana, a son of dhritaraashtra . next.
durvirocana, a son of dhritaraashtra . the prec.
durvishaha1, a son of dhritaraashtra .
duryodhana1, the eldest son of dhritaraashtra and gaandhaari, and the enemy of the paandavas . b, อด, อด, อด, . the following synonyms aajamidha6, q.v. bhaarata, bharatashardula, bharatashreshtha, bhaarataagrya, bharatarshabha, bharata sattama, bhaaratasattama, q.v. dhaartaraashtra, dhritaraashtraja, dhritaraa shtraputra, dhritaraashtrasunu, dhritaraa shtrasuta, dhritaraashtraatmaja, q.v. gaandhaari, . gaandhaariputra, . kaurava, kauravashreshtha, kauravanan dana, kauravaatmaja, kauravendra, kaura veya, kauravya, q.v. kuru, kurushreshtha, kurudvaha, kuru kulashreshtha, kurukulaadhama, kurumukhya, kurunandana, kurupati, kurupravira, kuru pungava, kururaaja, kurusattama, kurusimha, kuruttama, kuruvardhana, q.v. suyodhana, .
duryodhana2, king of maahishmati. b, .
duryodhanasuta, pl. .
. karna proposed to duryodhana that he should celebrate a raajasuya sacrifice like yudhishthira. but as the purohita told him that so long as yudhishthira and dhritaraashtra were living he could not undertake the raajasuya sacrifice, and advised him to cause the tributary kings to pay him tribute in gold, and with that gold to make a plough, and to plough the sacrificial compound with it, and then to perform a vaishnava sacrifice that nobody had performed before save the ancient vishnu which was equal to the raajasuya, this plan was agreed upon. duryodhana appointed persons to their respective tasks, and desired all the artisans to construct the plough, etc. . when vidura had announced to dhritaraashtra that the preparations had been made, messengers were dispatched to invite the princes and the brahmans. dushaasana ordered one messenger to invite the paandavas, but yudhishthira replied that they could not come before the com pletion of the thirteenth year. bhima threatened the other paandavas said nothing unpleasant. vidura was charged with the distribution of food to the guests. after the completion of the sacrifice, all the kings having been dismissed, duryodhana, with his brothers and karna and shakuni, entered haastinapura . duryodhana was praised by most of the citizens, and his friends compared him to yayaati, nahusha, maandhaatri, and bharata, who had gone to heaven after celebrating this sacrifice . karna said that when duryodhana had slain the paandavas in battle and completed the raajasuya sacrifice he would once more honour him thus, and promised that until he had slain arjuna he would not allow his feet to be washed, nor taste meat, and he would observe the asura vow, and never refuse to give to whoever might solicit him.
dushana, a raakshasa .
dushkarna, a son of dhritaraashtra .
dushmanta, v. dushyanta.
dushparaajaya, a son of dhritaraashtra .
dushpradharsha, a son of dhritaraashtra . next.
dushpradharshana, a son of dhritaraashtra . next.
dushpraharsha, a son of dhritaraashtra .
dushvanta, v. dushyanta.
dushyanta1, an ancient king, the husband of shakuntalaa and the father of bharata . the founder of the paurava line was who ruled the whole world, even the mlecchas. description of his happy rule. . could take up the mountain mandara and support it in his arms . one day . went a hunting . having come to a forest, which was situated near the river maalini and was the resort of ascetics, caaranas, gandharvas, apsarases, monkeys, vaalakhilyas, etc in the hermitage of the rishi kanva kaashyapa, saw kanvas ated daughter shakuntalaa, .
dushyanta2, son of ajamidha .
dvaadashabhuja, a warrior of skanda. u, .
dvaadashaaksha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
dvaipaayana2, a lake . next.
dvaitavana1, name of a forest .
dvaitavana2, name of a lake .
dvaitavanapravesha . the paandavas, with krishna and dhaumya, on costly chariots yoked with excellent steeds, went into the forest, distributing nishkas of gold, etc to brahmans versed in shikshaa, akshara, and mantras, and followed by twenty attendants with bows, etc while indrasena, with the princesss clothes and ornaments and the nurses and maidservants, followed in a chariot. the citizens walked round yudhishthira, and the brahmans and principal men of kurujaangala of all castes saluted him and blamed the dhaartaraashtras, etc. arjuna told them that after their exile they would take away the good name of their enemies, and asked them to beseech the ascetics for their good. at last they returned to their respective abodes . after a conference between yudhishthira and arjuna, they resolved upon dwelling for these twelve years at the sacred lake dvaitavana in the forest of the same name, on the banks of bhogavati, surrounded by many brahmans, and saluted by hosts of caaranas and siddhas, who came to see yudhi shthira . while they were dwelling there, dhaumya performed their ishtis and offerings to the pitris, etc. once the old rishi maarkandeya came to them and smiled, recollecting raama daasharathi, whom he had seen on the top of the rishyamuka, and comforted yudhishthira by reminding him of the aforesaid raama, naabhaaga, bhagiratha, etc and alarka, the king of the kaashis and the karushas, the seven rishis, who had followed the ordinance of the creator and therefore blazed in the firmament so you will regain prosperity. then he went away in a northerly direction . the dvaitavana forest becoming filled with brahmans, and always resounding with vedic recitations, mingling with the twangs of the bows of the paandavas, a beautiful union of brahman and kshatriya customs was produced. therefore one evening the rishi baka daalbhya represented to yudhishthira that the kshatriya should always consult with a brahman, as did the asura king bali, the son of virocana, who went to no other tirtha than the brahmans, and then had all his wishes gratified, but who met with destruction when he began to act unjustly towards them. then all those brahmans, dvaipaayana, naarada, jaamadagnya, etc praised yudhishthira .
dvaapara1, name of a yuga . in the . religion decreases by a half naaraayana is yellow the veda becomes divided into four parts, etc . b, . b, .
dvaapara2, a term of dice .
dvaaparayuga, v. dvaapara1.
dvaarakaa, the capital of the vrishnis . b, . b, . b, . b, . dvaaravati, kushasthali.
dvaarapaala, said of various yakshas, . do pl .
dvaaravati, the capital of the vrishnis . b, . d, . dvaarakaa, kushasthali.
dvaarikaa, v. dvaarakaa.
dvetavana, v. dvaitavana.
dvijarshi sg pl .
dvimurdhan, an asura .
dvipin, pl. .
dvita, a rishi, brother of ekata and trita. b, . c, . b, .
dvivida, a monkey chief .
dyaus1 . u, .
dyaus2, a vasu .
dyumatsena, king of the shaalvas, husband of shaibyaa, and father of satyavat .
dyutaparvan . when vyaasa with his disciples came to take leave, yudhishthira asked him about the celestial, atmospherical, and terrestrial portents which, according to the statement of naarada, had happened at the raajasuya. vyaasa said that in thirteen years they would be fulfilled by the destruction of all the kshatriyas, and that yudhishthira would that very night see shiva gazing incessantly towards the direction presided over by the king of the pitris . then vyaasa with his disciples proceeded towards kailaasa. yudhishthira resolved to die in order that he might not be the cause of the destruction of the kshatriyas, but called back from his intention by phaalguna, he took upon him the vow not to speak a harsh word to his brothers or to any of the kings. then, having gratified the pitris and gods, he entered his own palace, accompanied by his ministers . duryodhana, accompanied by shakuni, by and by beheld all the sabhaa he mistook a piece of crystal for water and drew off his clothes, mistook a lake for land and fell in, etc and was laughed at by bhima, arjuna, the twins, and the menials of the palace. filled with wrath and jealousy he became pale, and returned to haastinapura, together with shakuni . shakuni told him to ask yudhishthira, who was very fond of gambling and did not know how to play, to play at dice then he, who was skilled in dice, would win his king and prosperity for duryodhana . shakuni told dhritaraashtra that duryo dhana was pale and depressed dhritaraashtra asked duryodhana the cause duryodhana told him that yudhishthira supported, snaatakas, giving to each of them thirty slave girls that, other brahmans daily ate at his palace the best food off golden plates that the king of kaamboja sent to him innumerable skins, etc. that the ocean brought the vaaruna nectar to him in a vessel of copper, as the celestial wives to indra that vaasudeva, having brought an excellent conch, bathed him with sea water brought in, jars of gold, etc from the eastern, southern, and western oceans that the conches, which were blown when, brahmans were fed, could be heard there almost incessantly, etc. duryodhana proposed to dhritaraashtra to invite yudhi shthira to a game at dice with shakuni, and prevented him from consulting vidura till he had had a sabhaa built. then he ordered vidura, who dissuaded him in vain, to invite yudhishthira. vidura in great sorrow went to bhishma . at the request of janamejaya, vaishampaayana related that dhritaraashtra, having ascertained the opinion of vidura, sought to bring duryodhana back from his purpose to play at dice but duryodhana would not give way, relating that the nipas, citrakas, the kaukuras, the kaaraskaras, and the lohajanghas were like bondsmen in the house of yudhi shthira, and that bhima, arjuna, and draupadi had laughed at his mistake regarding the crystal, etc. . duryodhana enumerated to dhritaraashtra the articles brought as tribute from various peoples to yudhishthira. yaajnaseni daily took care that everybody, including the deformed and the dwarfs, had eaten before she herself took her meal. only two peoples did not pay tribute to yudhishthira, the paancaalas, in consequence of their relationship by marriage, and the andhaka vrishnis, in consequence of their friendship . duryo dhana continued to enumerate kings, etc who waited upon yudhishthira at the raajasuya. the ocean brought that vaaruna conch, which vishvakarman had constructed with, nishkas, and which prajaapati had in a former kalpa presented to indra with that conch krishna anointed yudhishthira. when the conches were blown, those among the kings who were weak fell n, and dhrishtadyumna, saatyaki, the paandavas, and keshava laughed then bibhatsu gave to the principal brahmans bullocks with horns plated with gold, and yudhishthira obtained, like harishcandra, such properity that he surpassed rantideva, naabhaaga, yauvanaashva, manu, prithu vainya, bhagiratha, yayaati, and nahusha . continuation of the con versation between dhritaraashtra and duryodhana . as shakuni recommended the match of dice and praised his own dexterity in gambling, and duryodhana spoke reprovingly of vidura on account of his fondness for the paandavas, etc dhritaraashtra reluctantly caused the sabhaa to be built, with, columns aned with gold and lapis lazuli, a krosha in length and breadth, and then ordered vidura to bring yudhishthira and his brothers . vidura arrived at the palace of yudhishthira and invited him. yudhishthira, having learned that he should have to play with shakuni, vivimshati, citrasena, satyavrata, purumitra, and jaya, the most desperate and terrible gamblers, always depending upon deceit, was unwilling to come but as he had made the vow never to refuse when challenged, he set out for haastinapura the next day with his relatives, draupadi, brahmans, etc riding on the chariot taken charge of by baahlika, and when he had arrived he saluted bhishma, drona, karna, kripa, ashvatthaaman, somadatta, duryodhana, shalya, saubala, dushaasana, jayadratha, etc and gaandhaari and dhritaraashtra . shakuni exhorted yudhishthira to gamble. yudhi shthira quoted asita devala, but he was obliged to assent duryodhana said that he himself would supply jewels, etc and that it was for him that shakuni would play . the play began, the stake being a wreath of pearls, which shakuni won . shakuni then won from yudhishthira his treasury, slave girls, serving men, elephants, chariots, the gandharva horses which citrasena had given to arjuna, his warriors, and nidhis . vidura, addressing dhrita raashtria, quoted the words of kaavya, and reminded him that among the bhojas they had abaned an unworthy son the andhakas, yaadavas, and bhojas had abaned kamsa, and when he had been slain by krishna the whole tribe became glad for a hundred years let arjuna slay this suyodhana at thy command he quoted what kaavya said to the asuras in order to induce them to aban jambha, and related how a king from greediness after gold killed some gold vomiting fowls that dwelt in his house, and so destroyed both his present and future wealth . vidura warned against the gambling, and suggested to dhritaraashtra rather to win the paandavas than their wealth, and to let shakuni, the hill king, return whence he came . duryodhana blamed vidura for his partiality towards the paandavas, and said that he would only follow the advice of his own intellect. vidura complained of the ingratitude of kings and their fondness of flattery . yudhishthira lost his wealth, kine, horses, goats, and sheep, from parnaashaa to the eastern bank of the sindhu, his city, country, lands, and the wealth of all dwelling therein, except that of the brahmans, and all those persons themselves except the brahmans, the ear rings and nishkas and other ornaments of the princes who were present, then nakula, sahadeva, arjuna, bhima, himself, and draupadi now bhishma, drona, kripa, vidura, etc all gave way to grief, but dhritaraashtra, karna, dushaasana, etc were glad . duryodhana ordered kshattri to bring hither draupadi to sweep the chambers and stay with the servant maids vidura declared that having lost himself, yudhishthira could not lawfully stake draupadi, and said a goat had once swallowed a knife, and when it was pierced by it the hunter placed the head of the animal on the ground, and when drawing the knife out he tore its throat frightfully therefore not swallow the wealth of the paandavas . then duryodhana ordered the praa tikaamin to bring draupadi she ordered him to ask yudhishthira whether he had lost himself or her first as yudhishthira said nothing, duryodhana ordered that draupadi should come and put her question in the assembly she sent the suta back to the assembly saying that she would what aged and virtuous persons would tell her all sat without uttering a word but yudhishthira sent a trusted messenger to draupadi, directing that, although in consequence of her season having come she was attired in one piece of cloth only. she should come before her father in law weeping bitterly. duryodhana again ordered the praatikaamin to bring her, and as he seemed irresolute, he asked dushaasana to so. as she would flee to the ladies household, dushaasana dragged her in by her hair, while she was praying to krishna and jishnu, who were naaraayana and nara, and blaming drona, bhishma, vidura, etc for looking silently on this crime. as she was casting a glance upon her enraged lords, dushaasana, dragging her still more forcibly, addressed her, slave slave and laughed aloud, applauded by karna, shakuni, and duryodhana, while all the others were filled with sorrow. bhishma declared himself to be unable to decide the question she had put. as she then asked the others present to decide it, dushaasana spoke many harsh words, and bhima, looking at yudhishthira, gave way to wrath . bhima blamed yudhishthira, and ordered sahadeva to bring fire, as he wanted to burn the hands of yudhishthira, but arjuna appeased him. vikarna repeatedly appealed to those present to decide the question, and as they did not say one word, he declared that as yudhishthira must be regarded as of no authority, because he had shown himself addicted to the vice of gambling, etc he regarded draupadi as not won. all applauded him, except karna, who maintained that she had been justly won, and as, contrary to the ordinance of the gods that a woman should have only one husband, she had five husbands, there was no impropriety in dragging her to the assembly, and even to uncover her. karna then asked dushaasana to take off the robes of the paandavas and the attire of draupadi. the paandavas took off their upper garments, and dushaasana began to drag off the attire of draupadi. but as she thought of and cried to hari, dharma continually covered her anew with excellent clothes. bhima swore that he would drink the blood of dushaasana. all blamed dushaasana and dhritaraashtra. vidura exhorted the assembly to answer the question put by draupadi, and related the dialogue of prahlaada and aangirasa . v. prahlaada. the kings answered not a word, and karna told dushaasana to take away the slave woman krishnaa to the inner apartments . dragged by dushaasana, draupadi saluted the assembly, complained of being exposed to the gaze of the crowd, and again asked them to answer her question. bhishma again declared himself unable to decide it, but thought yudhishthira ought to decide it . duryodhana said to draupadi let thy husbands decide the question, and, by making yudhishthira the just a liar, free thee from slavery. bhima said that only his obedience to yudhishthira and the admoni tions of arjuna retained him from killing the wretched sons of dhritaraashtra. bhishma, drona, and vidura asked him to forbear . karna exhorted draupadi to choose a new husband among the sons of dhritaraashtra, and duryodhana, after having exhorted yudhishthira to decide the question, uncovered his left thigh and showed it to draupadi. bhishma swore that he would break this thigh of his. vidura warned them, and was of opinion that yudhishthira had no right to stake her. duryodhana said that if bhima, arjuna, and the twins declared that yudhishthira was not their master, then draupadi should be free. arjuna said that he was certainly their master before the play, but having lost himself, let all the kauravas judge whose master he could be after that. just then a jackal began to cry near the agnihotra of dhrita raashtra, and other terrible omens were heard. on that account gaandhaari and vidura remonstrated with dhritaraashtra, who blamed duryodhana and granted a boon to krishnaa. she chose that yudhishthira should become free from slavery. as she was granted a second boon, she asked that bhima and his brothers with their chariots and bows should regain their liberty. she refused to ask a third boon . karna praised draupadi for having saved her husbands. bhima threatened to slay all his foes instantly, but was retained by arjuna and yudhishthira . dhritaraashtra sent yudhishthira with his brothers and krishnaa upon their chariots to indra prastha, having asked him not to remember the harshness of duryodhana .
dyutimat1, king of the madras .
dyutimat2, a mountain in kushadvipa .
dyutimat3, king of the shaalvas .
dyutimat4, king of maahismati. b, .
edi, a maatri. u, .
ekacakra, an asura .
ekacakraa, a city .
ekacudaa, a maatri. u, .
ekashringa, pl a class of pitris .
ekahamsa, a tirtha, .
ekajata, a warrior of skanda. u, .
ekaaksha1, an asura .
ekaaksha2, a warrior of skanda. u, .
ekalavya, a nishaada prince . among the kings and princes who flocked to drona by thousands to learn the dhanurveda was e the son of the nishaada king hiranyadhanus. not admitted, because he was a naishaadi, he in the forest practised weapons before a clay image of drona and became very skilled in shooting. one day when the sporting of the princes came upon him he shot seven arrows into its mouth, and thus pierced the came back to the paandavas, who highly admired the precision of the archer. in order that he might not surpass arjuna, drona took from e. the thumb of his right hand as his tutorial fee, . c, . naishaadi, nishaada, nishaadaraaja.
ekapad1, an asura .
ekapaada, pl a people .
ekaparvataka, a mountain .
ekaasana, pl a people .
ekata, a rishi, brother of dvita and trita. b, . c, . b, .
ekatvacaa, a maatri. u, .
ekavaktraa, a maatri. u, .
elaapatra, a serpent .
elaputra, v. elapatra.
elavila, v. ailavila.
eraka, a serpent .
gabdhakaali, v. gandhakaali.
gada, a vrishni, the younger brother of krishna . b, .
gadaaparvan . c, .
gadaavasaana, name of a place near mathuraa .
. gadaaparvan, gadaayuddha. requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related duryodhana agreed to fight his foes, one at a time yudhishthira granted his request, adding that if he could slay even one of the five paandavas he would remain king. duryodhana rose from the lake and challenged the paandavas yudhishthira taunted him with his unfair conduct in slaying abhimanyu . krishna reproved yudhi shthira for his rashness in staking everything on the result of such a single combat with duryodhana bhimasena assured krishna that duryodhana would be no match for him in an encounter with the mace krishna applauded bhima, and exhorted him to slay duryodhana saatyaki, etc applauded bhima bhimas boastful address to yudhishthira and duryodhana duryodhanas dignified reply, applauded by the paandavas and srinjayas the elephants began to grunt and the steeds to neigh the weapons of the paandavas blazed forth of their own accord . when the battle between bhima and duryodhana was about to commence, bala raama, having heard that that battle between his two disciples was about to begin, came and was worshipped by the paandavas, krishna, etc. he said that forty two days had passed since he departed, having set out under the constellation pushya and come back under the constellation shravana he was clad in blue robes and of fair complexion. then that dreadful encounter took place . requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related how bala raama had determined upon and set out on a pilgrimage to the tirthas on the sarasvati, having let the sacred fire be brought from dvaarakaa and the priests, and having given away rich ations to every one who wished for them, accompanied by priests, friends, brahmans, chariots, elephants, steeds, and servants, visiting all the sacred places along her course. in the course of his wanderings he at last came to kurukshetra. requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related the baladevatirthayaatraa . requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related beholding bala raama, duryodhana rejoiced. according to the proposal of bala raama, yudhishthira with his brothers and duryodhana proceeded westwards to samanta pancaka on the southern side of the sarasvati. . and caa. praised duryodhana. description of bhima and duryo dhana . duryodhana told yudhishthira to behold the battle, protected by the kaikeyas, etc. . that large assembly of kings sat n, as did also bala raama, who was worshipped by all around him. bhima and duryodhana stood inciting each other with violent speeches . the dispute between the two heroes . at last duryodhana said, what is the use of bragging fight with me, and was applauded by the somakas, etc. the elephants grunted aloud and the steeds neighed repeatedly the weapons of the paandavas blazed forth of their own accord . description of the combat g and men wondered the paandavas and the somakas feared ating the manลuvre called kaushika, duryodhana baffled bhimas mace as duryodhana once fell n to the earth, the srinjayas cried aloud, so also did the paandavas bhimasena then had his coat of mail fractured and was prostrated on the ground, but rose, steadying himself with great effort . arjuna inquired of krishna about the relative merits of the two combatants krishna said that their training had been equal, but bhima was superior in strength duryodhana was superior in skill and had had more practice by fighting fairly bhima would never succeed in winning, but by fighting unfairly he would surely be able to slay duryodhana, just as the asuras were vanquished by the gods, virocana and vritra by indra with the aid of deception bhima has vowed to break the thighs of duryo dhana with his mace let him accomplish that vow of his he censured yudhishthira for his folly, and quoted a verse uttered by ushanas duryodhana has practised with the mace for full thirteen years. arjuna struck his own left thigh before the eyes of bhimasena, who understood the sign. as duryodhana set his heart on the manลuvre called dvasthaana and jumped upwards, bhimasena hurled his mace at the thighs of duryodhana and fractured them. portents appeared showers of blood and showers of dust were poured by indra a loud noise was made by y raa and psh. the paancaalas and the paandavas were filled with anxiety g si and caa. went away . the paandavas and somakas rejoiced bhimasena rebuked duryo dhana, and touched his head with his left foot, which was censured by yudhishthira, who grieved for duryodhana baladevas wrath was excited upon seeing duryo dhana struck below the navel he rushed on to slay bhima, but was seized and pacified by krishna . baladeva praised duryodhana and cursed bhimasena, and then ascended his chariot and proceeded towards dvaarakaa. the paancaalas, etc became dejected krishna and yudhishthira, bhimasena, etc and duryodhana spoke about what had passed . celestial showers descended on duryodhanas head g aps and si. praised him. the paandavas and krishna became ashamed but krishna justified the use of unfair means for the slaughter of the kuru warriors . the paandava warriors proceeded to the kuru camp, which was entirely deserted krishna caused arjuna to take n the gaandiva and his inexhaustible quivers, and then to dismount then krishna also dismounted the celestial ape disappeared, and the chariot, with its steeds, etc was reduced to ashes. krishna congratulated yudhishthira on his victory, and yudhishthira attributed that victory to krishnas power . in the encampment of the kurus they found great wealth at krishnas suggestion the paandavas and saatyaki resolved to pass the night at a spot outside the camp, on the banks of the oghavati. they then dispatched krishna to haastinapura in order to pacify the wrath of gaandhaari, and to comfort her and dhritaraashtra. he set out with daaruka upon his chariot, yoked with shaibya and sugriva . asked by janamejaya, vaishampaayana said that the reason why yudhi shthira sent krishna to haastinapura was his fear that gaandhaari, by means of her ascetic merit, should reduce the paandavas to ashes, because duryodhana had been slain unfairly vyaasa will be there. krishna caused daaruka to equip his chariot, and quickly set out for haastinapura. he arrived at dhritaraashtras palace, where vyaasa had arrived before him he comforted dhritaraashtra and gaandhaari, who said that her heart had again become steady . then krishna came to know the evil that was meditated by ashvatthaaman, and suddenly took leave, requested by dhritaraashtra and gaandhaari to protect the paandavas, and proceeded with daaruka. vyaasa comforted dhritaraashtra. krishna arrived at the camp and informed the paandavas . requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya narrated the lamentations of duryodhana while lying on the field with his thighs broken he thought himself happy, and asked sanjaya to bring his message to his parents and to ashvatthaaman, etc and took leave of the message bearers he was confident that caarvaaka, the mendicant devotee, would avenge his death. thousands of men, with eyes full of tears, fled away the earth trembled, etc. the messengers went and informed ashvatthaaman and then went away . ashvatthaaman, etc came to duryodhana, who lay surrounded by carnivorous animals, etc. ashvatthaa mans lament and duryodhanas reply ashvatthaaman vowed to slay all the paancaalas duryodhana let kripa install ashvatthaaman as the kuru generalissimo then they took leave of duryodhana and left him alone .
gaadhi or gaadhin, a king of kaanyakubja, the son of kushika and the father of vishvaamitra and satyavati . n, . b, . b, . c, . kaushika.
gaadhin, v. gaadhi.
gaganamurdhan, an asura .
gaja, a gaandhaara warrior, the younger brother of shakuni .
gajashiras, a warrior of skanda. u, .
gajakarna, a yaksha .
gajaanika, a paandava warrior .
gajodara, a warrior of skanda. u, .
gaalava, a rishi . ff . b, . b, . b, . pancaala, paancaala.
. in ancient times, in order to try vishvaamitra, who was then engaged in ascetic austerities, dharma in the form of the rishi vasishtha, and feigning him self hungry, came to his hermitage. vishvaamitra cooked caru, but could not approach dharma before his guest had dined with the other hermits. dharma said, have already dined wait here, and went away. vishvaamitra, bearing that food on his head and himself subsisting on air, waited a hundred years, while the ascetic gaalava waited on him. then dharma accepted that food, which was still warm and fresh, and called vishvaamitra a viprarshi, whereby he became a brahman. gaalava repeatedly asked vishvaamitra to take a gift from him as his preceptor, and at last vishvaamitra, seeing his persistency, requested him to give white steeds each with one black ear . gaalava got troubled and was gradually reduced to a skeleton. he thought of repairing to vishnu, when his friend garuda came, and said he had spoken to vishnu in his behalf, and that he would bear him . garuda described the east here savitri first rises, and the tapas of the saadhyas is performed at eve...the two eyes of dharma...here the daughters of daksha in primeval times gave birth to their children, and here the sons of kashyapa first multiplied here shakra was first anointed as king of the gods here is the tapas of indra and the gods, all their religious ceremonies here the creator first sang the vedas here saavitri was first said by savitri to the reciters of the vedas, and here the yajurveda was given by surya here the soma juice was first drunk by the gods, etc. it was here that varuna, repairing to paataala, obtained prosperity here the birth, growth, and death of the ancient vasishtha took place here first grew the hundred branches of om here the munis called dhumapaa first imbibed the smoke of the havis here the thousand rayed sun slays, rising, the wicked and ungrateful men and asuras here is the gate of the three worlds and the path to heaven and to felicity . garuda mentioned the remarkable subjects in the south pitripakshas trailokasya ushmapaa devaa the vishvedevas with the pitris, with whom they equally share the sacrifices in all the worlds the second r of dharma... the devarshis, pitrilokarshis, and raajarshis, who dwell here in great happiness... it is the region whither all must repair...there are nairritaa to be seen by the sinful the gandharvas chanting on mandara and in the abodes of the viprarshis raivata who, hearing the saamans, retired to the woods, leaving wife and friends and king saavarni and yaavakrita setting a limit to surya raavana soliciting immortality from the gods vritra incurring the enmity of shakra vaitarani filled with the bodies of persons condemned to hell... reaching this region the sun drops sweet water, and thence, proceeding again to the vaasishtha direction, once more drops dew there is garuda obtaining for food an enormous elephant and tortoise the great rishi cakradhanus birth from surya took place here the perfect brahmans, named shivaa, who fully had mastered the vedas, here obtained liberation here is bhogavati, ruled by vaasuki, takshaka, and airaavata. those that have to journey hither encounter here a thick gloom, so that it cannot be penetrated by either the sun or by agni even thou shalt have to pass this road . garuda mentioned the remarkable subjects and occurrences of the west varunas origin his instalment by kashyapa the moon, quaffing all the six juices of varuna, becomes young again in the beginning of the bright fortnight the daityas being routed and bound fast by vaayu the mountain asta night and sleep shakra beholding the goddess diti asleep, and cutting off her fลtus, whence sprang the maruts the roots of himavat stretching towards the eternal mandara, the end of which is not to be reached by journeying for even, years surabhi milking on the shores of the lake with golden lotuses in the midst of the ocean the headless trunk of svarbhaanu the chanting of the vedas by suvarna shiras dhvajavati, the daughter of the muni harimedhas, remaining in the air in consequence of suryas injunction, stay...the sources of the rivers here, in the abode of varuna, are the waters of the three worlds the abode of ananta, and of vishnu, and of pavana, and of the maharshi kashyapa maarica . the north has its name from saving from sin it is also called madhyama, i.e. between the east and the west. none can live there that is unamiable, etc. garuda mentioned its remarkable subjects and places badari, the asylum of naaraayana, krishna, jishnu, and brahmaan maheshvara with the effulgence of the yugaanta fire purusha dwelling with prakriti, invisible to munis, . with g y and si except nara and naaraayana there vishnu appears alone, having, heads and, legs there candramas was installed in the sovereignty over the brahmans mahaadeva receiving gangaa on his head devi practising austerities for obtaining maheshvara kaama the wrath here took place kuberas instalment, on the breast of kailaasa, in the sovereignty of raa y and g. caitraratha here is the asylum of the vaikhaanasas mandaakini mandara saugandhikavana, guarded by nairritas the plantain forest, etc. the siddhas the seven rishis with arundhati svaati brahmaan near yajna... the munis named dhaamaa guarding gaayantikaadvaara the man who passes beyond them will certainly meet with destruction, except naaraayana and nara or jishnu here is kailaasa, the abode of ailavila the origin of the ten apsarases vidyut prabhaa vishnupada, made by vishnu, when he, in his covering the worlds with three steps, stepped on the northern region here took place king maruttas sacrifice at ushirabija, by the side of the golden lake here was himavats gold mine, that exhibited itself to the viprarshi jimuta, who gave away the whole wealth to the brahmans, and had it called after his name here morning and evening the lokapaalas
ganaa, a maatri. u, .
gandaa, the wife of the shudra pashusakha. b, .
gandaka, pl a people .
gandakanda, a yaksha .
gandaki, a river. b, .
gandasaahvayaa, a river .
gandha1, . = shiva .
gandhamaadana, a mountain . b, . b g. is frequented by kimpurushas, siddhas, caaranas, vidyaa dharas, kinnaris, etc . e, . d, . e on the summits of g. kubera, the lord of the guhyakas, many raakshasas and apsarases live in joy. beside g. there are many smaller mountains and hills. the measure of human life there is, years. there the men are cheerful and endued with great energy and strength, and the women are all of the complexion of the lotus and highly beautiful, . d, . b, . b, . b, . e, . b, .
gandhamaadana2, a monkey chief .
. yudhishthira in vain proposed that bhima should return with krishnaa, sahadeva, dhaumya, the charioteers, cooks, etc to gangaa dvaara, while yudhishthira should proceed with nakula and lomasha. bhima promised to carry krishnaa and the twins. krishnaa said that she would be able to go. they entrusted to the pulinda king subaahu on the himavat, the servants indrasena, etc the cooks and stewards, and draupadis accoutrements, and began to proceed . yudhishthira complained to bhima that he had not seen arjuna for five years. they now should, in company with brahmans of strict vows, enter gandhamaadana, etc. . exhorted by lomasha, when they were about to go to the mountain mandara, they aed aakaashagangaa, and then proceeded with the rishis. then they saw the bones of the daitya naraka like to a white mountain. bis varaahaavataara, . as they, with the brahmans, entered gandhamaadana a terrible wind arose, followed by showers of rain, lightning, and torrents, during which they took shelter under trees, etc sahadeva carrying the sacred fire . when the tempest was over and the sun reappeared, they continued their journey . when they had proceeded only a krosha, draupadi sank n. nakula ran forward and supported her, and the others hastily came, and yudhishthira took her on his lap and lamented. dhaumya and the other brahmans comforted and blessed him, and by reciting mantras capable of dispelling raakshasas, and by performing ceremonies, while she was touched and fanned by the paandavas, they made her regain her senses. the twins pressed her feet with their hands. bhima promised yudhishthira to carry them all over the snowy mountains, or ghatotkaca will carry us all. with yudhishthiras permission bhima thought of ghatotkaca, who immediately came and was embraced by bhima . ghatotkaca carried krishnaa through the air, and hundreds of other raakshasas carried the paandavas and the brahmans, while lomasha moved along the path of the siddhas. so they proceeded through regions inhabited by mlecchas, vidyaa dharas, monkeys, kinnaras, kimpurushas, gandharvas, etc and the northern kurus, towards kailaasa and badari, where they were received by the numerous rishis, and where they dwelt, beholding mainaaka, hiranyashikkara, bindusaras, and bhaagirathi, and offering oblations, etc.
gandhapaa, a class of gods .
gaandhaara, pl a people . gaandhaa raka, pl. gaandhari, pl.
gaandhaara1, name of a note, .
gaandhaaraadhipati, a certain king of the gaandhaaras .
gaandhaaraka2, adj. .
gaandhaari, pl a people .
gaandhaari, the daughter of the gaandhaara king subala, the wife of dhritaraashtra1, and the mother of duryodhana, etc . also the following synonyms gaandhaararaajaduhitri, q.v. saubaleyi, . saubali, . subalajaa, . subalasya putri, . subalasyaatmajaa, . subalaatmajaa, .
gaandhaari, wife of ajamidha .
gaandhaari, a goddess .
gaandhaari, wife of krishna .
. one day dvaipaayana, gratified with gaandhaaris hospitality, granted her the boon that she should have sons . she had borne the burden in her womb for two years, when she heard that kunti had brought forth a son she then struck her womb violently, and there came out a hard mass of flesh like an iron ball. when she was about to throw it away, vyaasa appeared and caused her to put the ball of flesh, sprinkled with cool water and divided into parts, into pots filled with clarified butter, which were placed in a concealed spot. after having said that she should open the covers of the pots after two years, vyaasa retired to himavat in order to devote himself to asceticism. duryodhana was younger than yudhishthira, being born on the same day as bhima. as soon as duryodhana was born he began to cry like an ass, and ill portending omens appeared. vidura, etc in vain told dhritaraashtra to aban him. within a month the sons of dhritaraashtra and one daughter were born. during the pregnancy of gaandhaari, dhritaraashtra begot the karana yuyutsu upon a maidservant of the vaishya class .
gandharva1, pl the celestial musicians or singers aapsarasaam...amshaavataaranamamshaavataaranam... deva gaapsarasaamdushyantaamshaavataaranam...gaapsarasaamaapsarasaan ganainahushaoraga raakshasaanyayaatisurarshi g narakarnasambhavaoraga rakshasaampaanduaakridabhumim devaanaam gaapsarasaam tathaa, in the northarjunaaapsarasa, present at the birth of arjunaenumerationsambhavap.trivarshakritayajnas tu gaanaam upaplave...sauvirahidimbavadhap.caitrarathap.muhurtam...vihitam kaamacaaraanaam yaksha g rakshasaamjaanaam ashvaanaam, citraratha gives horses, born among the g to each of the paandavasdeva gvaahaa, sc. hayaajaa...hayaayaksha raakshasa gaa, know the history of the kurustapatyup.girishreshthe deva gsevitesvayamvarap.vishvaavasur naarada parvatau ca gmukhyaa, present at the svayamvara of draupadidevarshi gsamaakulam...antarikshamsunasun.deva g yakshaanaam... sarvaratnaanisubhadraaharanap.musicians, pcr.gaandivadeva daanava gai, pujitam, sc. gaandivamkhaandavadah.attack krishna and arjunayaksha raakshasa g nara kinnara pannagaisabhaakriyap.aapsarasa, together with citrasena, present in the palace of yudhishthiralokapaalasabhaakhy.in the palace of yudhishthirashakra sabhaav.in the palace of indrayamasabhaav.in the palace of yamavarunasabhaav.aapsarasaam ganai, in the palace of varunavaishravanasabhaav.in the palace of kuberaaapsarasaan ganaa, kinnaraa naama gaa naraa naama tathaapare, aanaam pataya, sc. vishvaavasu, etc.brahmasabhaav.aapsarasaam ganaa, in the palace of brahmaanaapsarasa, lokapaala sabhaakh.aapsarasa, in the palace of kuberain the palace of indraarjunarakshitam desham, in the north, conquered by arjunasuryasiddha caarana gaa, follow the chariot of the sundvaitavanaprav.aapsarasaam, sc. lokamdraupadiparitaapav.aasura raakshasaaindralokaabh.accompanied indrain the world of indratumburushreshthaasiddha caarana gaitirthayaatraap.aapsarasa, in pushkaravadavaaaapsarasaam ganai, in vadavaakuru kshetraaapsarasa, in kurukshetratirthayaatraap.siddha caarana gaa, in saugandhikavanasindho prabhavam...siddha gsevitamsiddha caarana g maanushaa, in gokarnaprayaagain prayaagadhaumyatirthak.yaksha rakshobhi...sevitam...shailamgangaabhaagirathi...deva gsevitaaparashuraamaseen in the body of raama daasharathiagastyop.manushyo aga g yaksha kimpurushaadevaa sa gmahoragaaturyeshusagararaakshasaangangaavataranaoraga yakshaamandaraon mandaragandhamaadanapr.skanaakhyaanadeva ggitaimanushyagrahak.aanaam yaa maataa saa garbham grihya gacchatiaash caapi yam divyaa samvishanti naram bhuvi unmadyati sa tu kshipram graho gaandharva eva saskandayuddhaghoshayaatraap.sainyaanaamkaamarupinaduryodhana and his brothers were made captives by the g headed by citrasena, but were liberated by the paandavaskarnadigvijayaaanaam tadaa ranaat, all. to mudgalaaapsarasaraamopaakhyaanap.devaasuratayakshaanugata, sc. kuberadeva g daanavaasitaa raavanasamv.aanaam yoshitaa, wives of raavanaaapsarasaraavanavadhadeva gaatridashaa saha g caaranairaamaabhisheka deva g yakshaanaamsa devaasura gaaaaraneyap.paandavapr.viraata considers bhimasena to be either the king of the gandharvas or indradraupadi says that she is the wife of five g.putraa graajasya mahaasattvasya kasyacit, varopama, i.e. nakulakicakavadhap.patayo mama, i.e. draupadispatayas tava, i.e. draupadisaanaam aham bhaaryaa pancaanaam, says draupadipatibhir mama, i.e. draupadis, said to have slain kicakaraajaayagoharanap.deva daanava gai pujitam, sc. gaandivamraajapratimam, sc. arjunaall. to deva yaksha g mahoragasamaakulam... mandalamcame to see the encounter between bhishma and arjunaaapsarasa, applauded arjunayudhishthira yakshapravaraaindravijayapitri g bhutaanaamaapsarasaam ganaajagat ...saasura gmdeva daanava gaadevarshi gaimukhyaaaapsarasaam ganaisanjayayaanap.yakshaapasarasaputrapratimam, sc. ashvatthaamansanatsujaatap.aanaam...rupamyaanasandhip.gandhamaadanam...siddha gsevitammaataliyop.gaalavacaritagaayanti gaathaa gaash cittabuddhiharaa, in the southyaksha siddhai, cannot see purusharuled by kuberabahu gdarshanaa, sc. maadhavimrigapakshinaamyayaatiapsarasaam ganai, worship yayaatibhaga vadyaanap.had been vanquished by arjuna, all. to oraga raakshasaaappeared in the body of krishnasainyaniryaanap.had been vanquished by arjuna, all. to rathaatirathas.deva g maanushaanambopaakhyaanap.aapsarasa, on the mountain mahendrapresent at the encounter between bhishma and raama jaamadagnyajambukh.aasura raakshasaa. on meru on the mountain nishadhashaakadvipaon meru in shaakadvipabhumip.deva gaa, in kushadvipadeshaa...deva gsevitaa, in krauncadvipa.bhagavadgitaap.aanaam citraratha, sc. asmi, says krishnayakshaasura siddhasanghaabhishmavadhap.came to see the battledeva gaadevaa sa gaasadevaasura gair lokaideva daanava gaa, applaud arjunadeva gaadevarshi gaadeva brahmarshi gaandevaah sa gaa, had come to see the battledeva g raakshasaadevaa sa gaasadevaasura gam lokamabhimanyuvadhap.sasuraasura gaa...lokaagandharvaastratumburupramukhebhya, from them arjuna had obtained the gaandharvam astram by means of tapasabhimanyuvadhap.deva daanava gaan mrityur haratishodasharaaj v. paurava natanartana gai, present at the sacrifice of paurava, singers, pcr v. bhagirathasung a gaathaa, v. maandhaatrioragapakshina, came to the sacrifices of maandhaatri, v. prithu vainyaaapsarasathe g. and apsarases milked perfumes from the earth into a vessel made of a lotus leaf citraratha became their calf and vishvaruci their milkerpratijnaap.sa gaa...lokaasingers, pcr.jayadrathavadhap.devaa sa gaacaaranaa saha gaa. applaud saatyakidevaan sa gaan, had been vanquished by arjuna, all. to applaud karna and bhimasenadeva daanava gaadevaasura gaadeva g daanavaaghatotkacavadhap.siddha g pishaacasanghaa, applaud ashvatthaa manhriyamaane tadaa, karna, gair dhrita raashtraje, all. to deva g yakshaanaamdevai...sa daitya yaksha gaidevarshi g surarshisanghaayakshaadeva gsamaa kulamdeva gdipaadyaideva g daanavadronavadhap.aa ghoshayaatraayaam citrasenaadayo jitaa, all. to in the welkinnaaraayanaastramokshanap.deva daanava gaas trastaanaaraayanayakshaandeva gyonishunaaraayanaastramokshap. aapsarasa, worship the linga of shivatripuraa khyaanapraised shivakarnap.dvaitavane...gai samabhidruta... tvam i.e. karna prathamam palaayita, all. to citrasenamukhaan, were vanquished by arjuna, page2 b deraan sa gaansadevaasura gaams triml lokaandeva daanava gaa อดtumburumukhaa, sided with arjuna
gandharva3, sg . b, . names of individual gandharvas angaaraparna, . citraangada, . citrasena, . dhritaraashtra, . tumburu, . vishvaavasu, .
gaandharva, adj. .
gaandharva . b, .
gandharvanagara . c, .
gandharvaanaam cirtham, a tirtha on the sarasvati. d there many gandharvas, headed by vishvaavasu and possessed of ascetic merits, pass their time singing and dancing, . gandharvatirtha.
b by practising ascetic penances arjuna had obtained the g. from the gandharvas
gandharvi, the mother of the horses .
ganesha1, a god . gananaayaka, ganeshaana, heramba, vighnesha.
gangaa, the river ganges v . . . f, . b, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, . b, . b, . f, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . m, . b, . l, . g, . aakaashagangaa, bhagirathasutaa, bhaagirathi, shailaraajasutaa, shailasutaa, devanadi, haimavati, jaahnavi, jahnukanyaa, jahnusutaa, samudramahishi, tripathagaa, tripathagaamini.
gaanga, adj. .
gangaadvaara, name of the place where the gangaa enters the plains . i, . b, . b, . f by bathing in g. and kushaavarta and bilvaka on nilaparvata, and also in kanakhala one is freed from his sins and ascends to heaven by bathing in apaam hrada one obtains the merit of a horse sacrifice. gangaa flows in a northerly direction by bathing in tristhaana, which belongs to maheshvara, during a month, one becomes able to see the godsaanushaasanik .
gangaahrada, a tirtha . o
gangaamahaadvaara, v. gaayantikaadvaara.
. asked by sagara to bring back the horse and deliver him from hell, amshumat went to the spot where the earth had been excavated, entered the sea by that very way, and beheld kapila and the horse. as he bowed his head before kapila, etc kapila granted him the horse, and that his fathers should be purified and go to heaven, when his sons son, by the favour of shiva, brought tripathagaa from heaven. when he had brought the horse back to the sacrificial yard and narrated all the events to sagara, sagara grieved no more, but praised amshumat and finished the sacrificial rites. sagara was greeted by all the gods and converted the sea into a son of himself, and after a long reign placed his grandson on the throne and ascended to heaven. amshumat ruled the whole earth like sagara, and died after he had placed his son dilipa on the throne. dilipa in vain tried to effect the descent of gangaa in order to raise his forefathers. he then anointed his son bhagiratha as king, and practised austerities in the forest, and then ascended to heaven . bhagiratha made over his kingly duties to his minister, and practised austerities on the himavat during celestial years, living upon fruits, roots, and water. then gangaa haimavati appeared in a material form, and promised to besprinkle the bodies of his forefathers and carry them to heaven, and as there existed none in the three worlds except shiva, who was able to sustain her fall, she caused bhagiratha to go to kailaasa, where he, by his austerities, obtained the favour of shiva, who, surrounded by his awful attendants, came to himavat. there he caused bhagiratha to pray to gangaa. gangaa immediately came n from the sky, in the presence of the gods, maharshis, gandharvas, snakes, and yakshas, and shiva received her on his forehead, whence she fell to the earth, divided into three streams. at her request bhagiratha led her to the spot where the bodies of sagaras sons lay, while shiva went to kailaasa with the celestials. gangaa filled the sea, and bhagiratha ated her as his daughter and offered libations of water to his forefathers .
gangaa yamunayos tirtham, a tirtha. p by bathing in g. and at the mountain kalanjara and offering to the pitris, one obtains the merit of ten horse sacrifices by bathing in shashtihrada one obtains great merit on the day of full moon in the month of maagha thirty millions and ten thousands of tirthas come together in prayaaga, and by bathing there during the month of maagha one attains to heaven, .
gaangeya3, adj .
gangodbheda, a tirtha .
ganita, a vishvadeva .
gardabhi, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
garga, a rishi. e, . ii, . f, .
garga, pl a family of rishis .
gargasrotas, a tirtha on the sarasvati. e at g. garga, of venerable years and purified by way of ascetic penances, obtained the knowledge of time and its course, of the movements of the stars, and of all auspicious and unauspicious portents thence its name g. there the rishis always waited upon garga in order to obtain a knowledge of time
gaargya, one or more rishis . b, . b, .
gaargya, pl a people .
gaarhapatya, pl a class of pitris .
garishtha, an ancient rishi .
gaartsamada, adj. . b, .
garuda, the son of kashyapa and vinataa, the vehicle of vishnu, or the emblem of his flagstaff . b in the meantime g. came out bursting the egg and ascended the skies. the gods thought that it was agni, but were undeceivedaastikap.kadruaastikap b, bnil. and br without reposingb, etymology gurum bhaaram samaasaadyoddina, v. cpage3 b cf vaalakhilya, pl.by the penances of the vaalakhilyas g. had been born as the lord of winged creatures aastikap pakshiraatamshaavat.among the vainateyasvainateya, reckoned among the aadityasaarunau, sons of vinataaarjunapresent at the birth of arjunaraajyalaabhap.dvipaksha gprakhyair dvaaraiarghaaharanap.patataam mukham, ghoshayaatraap.rathair gnisvanaipaandavapr.patataam iva, sc. varayaanasandhip.krishna identified with arishtanemi, garuda, suparnamaataliyop.aatmajaa, enumeration of his descendantsg. who wished to devour the serpent sumukha was humiliated by vishnu, who then threw sumukha upon the breast or g.gaalavacaritathe friend of gaalava, whom he assisted in his search for horsesjambukh.vainateya ...suparna, abhimanyuvadhap.pannagaish chinnair genevaaanilaramhobhi...hayaijayadrathavadhap.udvavarha... pannagam go yathaabhava gottamaangayaana, says krishna to bhurishravasghatotkacavadhap. takshakaunaaraayanaastra mokshanap.aanilaramhasakarnap.prahitair ugrair pancaasyair uragair ivaturagaan gaanilaramhasahamsakaakiyop.sya gatau tulyaah, sc. hamsaakarnap.syeva patato jighriksho pannagottamamvaajibhir gopamaisyeva patato pannagaarthe yathaa puraayathaanaaga svayam ya aayaad gsya vaktramskandacame to the investiture of skandaaananaa, sc. the warriors of skandagave his favourite son, a peacock, to skandauparicaracarried uparicara up to the welkin, anugitaap.rukmapaksho nicitas trikono gaakriti
garuda2, name of a vyuha .
garuda, pl .
gaaruda, adj. .
garudi, said of svaahaa, .
garutmat, pl .
gatitaalin, a warrior of skanda. u, .
gaura, a mountain .
gaurashiras, a muni .
gauraashva, an ancient king .
gauramukha, a disciple of shamika .
gauraprishtha, an ancient king .
gauravaahana, a king .
gauri, a goddess in the retinue of umaa .
gauri, the wife of varuna . b, .
gauri, a river .
gautama1, name of one or more rishis . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . e indra coveting ahalyaa was cursed by gautama, but, for the sake of righteousness, he was not hurt, . g, . b, .
gautami, name of one or more women . b, .
gautami, a river . . b bhishma said an old brahman lady named gautami found her son dead, bitten by a serpent an angry fowler, arjunaka, bound the serpent with a string and brought it before gautami she told him to release it, as brahmans not harbour resentment, and there is no good in tormenting and killing an enemy the fowler mentioned how indra killed vritra and mahaadeva destroyed a sacrifice. the serpent said that mrityu had sent him on this errand. mrityu appeared and said that kaala was the real promoter surya, etc. are created and destroyed by kaala. kaala came and said that it was the childs karman that was the cause this was approved of by gautami and the fowler.
gavaaksha1, a monkey chief .
gavaaksha2, a gandhaara warrior, son of subala and brother of shakuni .
gavalgana, the father of the suta sanjaya .
gavaam aya, name of a sacrifice, .
gavaam bhavana, a tirtha .
gavaam loka, v. goloka.
gavaam tirtha, a tirtha .
gavaya, a monkey chief .
gaveshana, a vrishni prince .
gavija, a muni .
gavishtha, an asura .
gaya1, an ancient king, son of amurtarayas . at brahmasaras the raajarshi g the son of amurtarayas, many times performed sacrifices distinguished by hundreds of mountains of food and thousands of lakes of clarified butter, many hundred rivers of curds, and streams of curries by the thousand at the time when the gifts were given nothing could be heard but the chaunting of the vedas and in all lands people sung these songs in the sacrifice of gaya, etc . b, . g. aamurtarayasa did not eat anything during a hundred years but remains from libations of clarified butter. agni offered to grant him a boon. g. then desired to have a thorough knowledge of the vedas through ascetic penances, etc inexhaustible wealth without injury to others, always to be able to make gifts to brahmans, and to have sons begotten of wives of his own order. in his horse sacrifice the sacrificial stakes were of gold decked with gems, and were given to the brahmans, etc. his sacrificial altar was yojanas long by yojanas broad and yojanas high, of solid gold, decked with pearls, etc. upon the completion of that sacrifice twenty five hills of food remained and also many lakes and rivulets of savoury drinks, etc. in consequence of his glory gaya became renowned in the three worlds there is the eternal making banyan tree and brahmasaras, . i, . b, . aamurtarayasa .
gaya2, a sacred mountain . gayaa, gayashiras.
gaya3, a monkey chief .
gaya, pl a people, the inhabitants of gayaa . i, .
gayaa, a sacred place . s, .
gayashiras, a hill near gayaa . m, .
gaayana, a warrior of skanda. u, .
gaayantikaadvaara, name of a place .
gaayatri, name of a metre, and also of a certain verise . d, . b, .
gaayatryaa sthaana, a tirtha.
ghatajaanuka, a muni.
ghantakarna, a companion of skanda. u, .
ghatasrinjaya, pl a people .
ghatodara, an asura .
ghatotkaca, a raakshasa, son of hidimbaa and bhimasena paandava g.s son anjanaparvan is slain by ashvatthaaman, and g. himself is defeated by the sameraakshasaraakshasendramraaksha sendram, defeated by ashvatthaamanraakshasaatkrishna urged gh. to proceed against karnaencounter with alambusha, whom gh. slewraakshasapraadush cakre tato maayaam raakshasim raakshaseshvaramaayaam gh vinirmitaamencounter with karnayaadrishenayathaaencounter with alaayudhaslew alaayudhagh. again proceeded against karna, who slew him, hurling the dart which was given to him by indra, and with which he had intended to slay arjunahatamshaktim ghenemaam vyamsayitvaamentioned among the slainnihata, has hated the brahmans and the sacrificessaa shaktir vaasudevena vyamsitaa ca ghe e vyamsitaam, sc. shaktimhatvaavadhenahateraakshasendredronavadhap.nihatekarnap.has been slain by karnahas slain alambusham raakshasendram shakrashaktyaa nijaghnivaan, sc. karnahatahate...raakshaseshalyap.raakshasamgadaayuddhap.page3 b vadhaartham paanduputrasya yaacitaam shaktim eva cage vyamsayata, sc. krishnashraaddhap.raakshasendram, his body is crematedputra darshanap.raakshasa, among the dead warriors who, summoned by vyaasa, arose from the gangaasvargaarohanap.after death gh etc entered the gods and yakshasthe son of hidimbaabhaimaseni...raakshaseshvararaakshaseshvararaaksha sendraraakshasau raudrakarmaanau haalam bushaughc. has by error haidam
. the nightly combat after the fourteenth day a dreadful battle took place between the paancaalas and the kauravas. duryodhana. penetrated into the midst of the paandava host, and caused an immense slaughter. bhimasena, etc. duryodhana yudhishthira made duryodhana insensible drona advanced to the rescue of duryodhana the paandavas drona . arjuna, etc. drona. dhritaraashtra asked sanjaya about the battle . sanjaya related drona slew the kaikeyas and the sons of dhrishtadyumna, etc and shibi duryodhana sent drona a driver for his chariot the kalinga prince attacked bhima and was slain by bhima with his bare fiststhe brother of the kalinga prince, vishokaidescription of his chariotpage3 a, the father of somadatta the brother of karna with the vaayavya weapon, abaning yudhishthira, paancaalas, etc rallying the troops, page3 b, with white steeds of the sindhu breedbaahlikas son, description, advancing against dronaadvancing in order to get at dronaadvancing against dronaadvancing in order to slay dronaadvancing in order to slay drona, ascending shataanikas chariotwith terrible looking pishaacas of equine faces yoked to his chariot description krishna, dhaartaraashtrapage3 a dhaartaraashtra, proceeding towards dronashikhandin was carried away by his charioteerdescription, the paancaalas and paandavas in order to rescue dronain order to rescue dhrishtadyumnaalso dushaasana, etc having mounted the chariot of kritavarman his son uluka, especially drona and karnaespecially yudhishthiradescription, and the srinjayasdescriptionand krishnawho had celestial weapons, as also those used by raa. and as page3 b, description, with drona, etc. abaning karnadisregarding the advancing karnaabaning ghatotkacawho fled away, abaning karnabrother of baka having slain the raa description, page3 a
ghora1, name of a weapon .
ghora2, son of angiras. b, .
ghoraka, pl a people .
the rd of the minor parvans of mhbhr. . when the paandavas had arrived at the lake, and were dwelling in the woods visited by veda knowing ascetics, there came to them a brahman, who afterwards went away to dhritaraashtra and told him how the paandavas had become emaciated and reduced by wind and sun. dhritaraashtra was much afflicted, considering that yudhishthira, who had formerly used to sleep on beds of ranku skins and to be wakened by sutas and maagadhas, now slept on the bare ground he lamented the treatment he had permitted to be meted out to the paandavas, and feared lest they would avenge themselves arjuna, he thought, would not have left heaven, where he received the celestial weapons, if it were not for this purpose. this shakuni told to duryodhana, who was sitting with karna, and duryodhana was filled with grief . shakuni and karna proposed to duryodhana that they should go to dvaitavana to exult over the paandavas . duryodhana gladly approved the proposal, but feared that he might not obtain the permission of dhritaraashtra, who thought that the paandavas had become more powerful than before in consequence of their ascetic austerities. he asked them, with dushaasana, to find out some skilful pretext. the next morning karna and shakuni agreed with duryodhana that they should go there under the pretext of supervising their cattle stations . they then all saw dhrita raashtra. a cowherd, named samanga, who had been instructed beforehand, came to the king and spoke to him of the cattle. karna and shakuni asked him to give permission to duryodhana to go thither. dhritaraashtra suggested to send some faithful men, fearing some collision with the paandavas if they were to go thither themselves for though yudhishthira would not suffer his wrath to be awakened, bhima and draupadi were naturally passionate. shakuni promised that they would not go to the spot where the paandavas resided, and obtained the permission. duryodhana then started with karna, dushaasana, shakuni, etc and ladies by the thousand, followed by the citizens and their wives, with, chariots, etc and took up his quarters at the distance of a gavyuti from the lake of dvaitavana . having caused the calves to be marked, etc duryodhana, etc began to sport and go a hunting, and came to the lake. yudhishthira was then, together with draupadi, celebrating the diurnal raajarshi sacrifice according to the ceremonial used in the forest. when the attendants of duryodhana came to the banks of the lake to construct pleasure houses, they were forbidden to enter by a number of gandharvas, who told them that the king of the gandharvas had come from the abode of kubera, with his followers and several hosts of apsarases, etc and when duryodhana sent a number of his warriors, they also were prevailed upon by the gandharvas to return . a battle ensued between the soldiers of duryodhana and the gandharvas, headed by their king citrasena the soldiers of duryodhana fled, except karna, who killed hundreds of gandharvas. duryodhana, shakuni, dushaasana, and vikarna returned to assist karna, and the battle was renewed. citrasena made use of illusion it seemed as if every warrior of the kuru army were surrounded by ten gandharvas. the entire army of duryodhana again fled, except karna. the gandharvas then destroyed the chariot of karna, who, mounting the chariot of vikarna, was forced to drive away . duryodhana refused to fly, but the gandharvas destroyed his chariot and slew his charioteer and horses thereupon citrasena took him prisoner, and dushaasana, who was seated on his chariot, and citrasena, vivimshati, vinda, and anuvinda, and the royal ladies, were taken by other gandharvas, . the flying soldiers and ministers of duryodhana took refuge with yudhishthira . yudhishthira, saying that the honour of the family was being destroyed by the gandharvas seizing duryodhana, etc in their presence, prevailed upon his brother to rescue duryodhana, etc if possible, by conciliation or lightly skirmishing, otherwise by all means, yudhishthira being prohibited from partaking in the combat by his sacrifice. arjuna promised to rescue duryodhana or kill the king of the gandharvas . the four paandavas, cased in mail and riding in chariots drawn by fleet horses, encountered the gandharvas as these would not set duryodhana, etc free, as requested by arjuna, a fierce battle ensued . the gandharvas, in vain, attempted to break the chariots of the paandavas especially arjuna, by means of his aagneya weapon, sent millions of them to the abode of yama. the gandharvas then rose up to the skies, taking the dhaartaraashtras with them, and showering maces, darts, etc upon arjuna, who killed them with his weapons sthulaakarna, indrajaala, saura, aagneya, and saumya. at last citrasena rushed at arjuna, armed with a mace of iron as arjuna cut that mace in seven pieces with his arrows, citrasena, by means of his science, concealed himself from the view of arjuna, and thus continued to fight with him but arjuna destroyed his power of concealing himself by shooting at him with his celestial arms guided by the sound . then citrasena showed himself to arjuna, reminding him of his being his friend, and there was put an end to the battle . citrasena related to arjuna that, staying in his abode, he had become acquainted with the purpose of duryodhana, etc and had been requested by indra to bring duryodhana thither in chains together with his counsellors. arjuna entreated him to set duryodhana free, but, at the request of citrasena, they left it to be decided by yudhishthira yudhishthira then liberated all the kauravas. the gandharvas went away with the apsarases, and indra revived the slain gandharvas by sprinkling amrita upon them. friendly admonished by yudhishthira, duryodhana, over whelmed with shame, returned to his capital . when duryodhana, afflicted with grief, was approaching haastinapura with his army, karna congratulated him on the honourable victory over the gandharvas . duryodhana told karna that, as the gandharvas had resorted to illusion and ascended the skies, he had been captured with his army, and that it was the paandavas who had vanquished the gandharvas . duryodhana continued his narrative and declared that he would stay there abstaining from food, and that the others, headed by dushaasana, should go to haastinapura. he then offered the royal power to dushaasana. dushaasana, his voice choked in tears, refused to accept it. karna reproached them for weeping thus, and declared that the paandavas, who resided in the inions of duryodhana and enjoyed happiness under his protection, only did their duty in liberating him . karna continued explaining his opinion, that those who resided in the kings realm should always exert themselves to the best of their ability for the king if the paandavas had not followed duryodhana to the battle it would have been an improper act on their part. duryodhana, firmly resolved to leave the world, desired not to rise from where he sat . shakuni reproached duryodhana for his foolish despair, saying that he ought rather to reward the paandavas by granting them their paternal king. duryodhana embraced dushaasana, but did not waver from his purpose he spread kusha grass on the earth, etc and began to pray and worship mentally. the daiteyas and daanavas who had formerly been vanquished by the gods and were dwelling in paataala, having ascertained duryodhanas purpose, commenced a sacrifice with formulas, revealed by brihaspati and ushanas, according to the rites indicated in the atharvaveda and the upanishad, assisted by brahmans of rigid vows, well versed in the vedas and the vedaangas. after these rites were ended a sorceress arose, whom the daityas caused to bring duryodhana to them in the night . the daanavas said to him do not such a rash act as the vow of starvation. the suicide ever sinks into hell, and is blamed...in days of old we had obtained thee by ascetic austerities from maheshvara the upper part of thy body is wholly made of vajras, and is, therefore, invulnerable to weapons of every description the lower part of thy body was made of flowers by devi herself ...brave kshatriyas, headed by bhagadatta, will slay thy foes...in order to aid thee many daanavas have been born on earth. other asuras will also possess bhishma, drona, kripa, and others possessed by those asuras these heroes will aban their kindness and fight with thy foes...we have already settled the means of slaying arjuna the slain naraka has assumed the form of karna recollecting his former hostility he will encounter both keshava and arjuna, and vanquish arjuna in battle. indra in disguise will deprive karna of his earrings and coat of mail. we also have appointed innumerable daityas and raakshasas, the so called samshaptakas, who will slay arjuna...thou art ever our refuge, as the paandavas are the refuge of the gods. then the daanavas embraced and cheered him, and that very goddess carried him back to the spot where he had sat n intent upon putting an end to his life, and there she vanished. now duryodhana considered all as a dream, and thought he should defeat the paandavas in battle. and also karna, being possessed by the soul of naraka, and the samshaptakas, possessed by the raakshasas, were desirous of slaying arjuna and bhishma, drona, kripa, etc influenced by the daanavas, were not so affectionate towards the paandavas as they had been. duryodhana did not tell anyone of this. when the night had passed away karna again exhorted duryodhana, and promised to slay arjuna in battle. duryodhana arose and arranged his army, and went to haastinapura, accompanied by karna, shakuni, his brothers headed by dushaasana and bhurishravas, and somadatta, and baahlika . karnadigvijaya . duryodhanayajna . hearing the vow of karna, yudhishthira, filled with anxiety, made up his mind to aban dvaitavana. duryodhana with his brothers, and bhishma, drona, kripa, and karna ruled the earth justly and worshipped the brahmans by sacrifices and profuse gifts .
ghraanashravas, a warrior of skanda. u, .
ghritaaci, an apsaras, wife of pramati . aa, . b, . b, .
ghritapaa, a class of rishis .
ghritavati, a river .
ghurniaa, the maidservant of devayaani .
giraya . u, .
girisha2, name of a bow .
girigahvara, pl a people .
girikaa, the wife of vasu uparicara .
girivraja, the capital of the maagadhas . b, . raajagriha.
gitapriyaa, a maatri. u, .
go, pl. . surabhi go2, v. gonaaman.
goshringa, a mountain .
godaavari, a river .
godha, pl a people .
goghnata, pl a people .
goharanaparvan . meanwhile the spies of duryodhana returned to haastinapura and informed duryodhana, who was sitting with drona, karna, kripa, bhishma, his brothers, and the trigartas, that they had not found out the paandavas, but that kicaka had been slain . kaarna and dushaasana proposed that the other spies should be sent . drona said people like the paandavas never perish, let the abode which the paandavas are to occupy now be settled . bhishma applauded drona . kripa recommended precautions . the trigarta king, susharman, supported by karna, proposed to invade the city of viraata and to rob his kine and wealth, and thus to take revenge for the invasions of the matsyas headed by kicaka. duryodhana caused dushaasana to array their forces. susharman set out towards the south east on the seventh day of the dark fortnight, and the kauravas on the eighth day . after kicaka had been slain, viraata began to rest his hopes on the paandavas. his brothers, shataanika and madiraaksha, and the king himself, and suryadatta and shankha, the eldest son of viraata, put on their coats of mail. viraata also caused shataanika to order chariots for kanka, vallava, tantripaala, and daamagranthi . the matsyas overtook the trigartas shortly before sunset. shataanika and vishaalaaksha penetrated into the heart of the trigarta host. viraata, with suryadatta in his van and madiraaksha in his rear, began a single combat from chariots against susharman . the night interrupted the battle for a while, but it began once more when the moon arose. susharman and his younger brother made viraata prisoner, and the matsyas began to fly bhima would uproot a tree, but was prevented by yudhishthira, lest the people should recognize them then bhima, with nakula and sahadeva as protectors of his wheels, rushed against susharman, and the matsya warriors, viraatas son, and yudhishthira, etc followed him the charioteer of susharman was dragged to the ground. madiraashva came to the aid of bhima. viraata leapt n from the chariot of susharman, seizing the mace of the latter, and ran in pursuit of him susharman was seized by bhima, but set free by yudhishthira . the paandavas passed the night on the field of battle honoured by viraata. as proposed by yudhishthira, viraata ordered messengers to proclaim the victory in the city. the messengers repaired to the city that very night, and at sunrise they proclaimed the victory at the city gates . meanwhile duryodhana, etc invaded the matsya country and took away the kine. hearing this, bhuminjaya, who had been left by the king in the empty city, and whose charioteer had been slain in a great battle, followed the advice of krishna and sent uttaraa, who prevailed upon brihannalaa to become the charioteer of uttara. uttaraa and her maidens asked arjuna to bring fine clothes for their ls when he had vanquished the kurus . seeing the host of the kurus, uttara became agitated with fear and jumped n from the chariot and began to flee, but was seized by arjuna and made to hold the reins, while arjuna had to fight . bhishma, drona, etc suspected the comer to be arjuna, and many portents were explained by drona in that sense. karna blamed drona, and duryodhana said that if it were arjuna the paandavas must go into exile for twelve more years . having reached the shami tree, arjuna ordered uttara to fetch the weapons of the paandavas, including gaandiva, which were deposited there . believing that a corpse had been tied up in the tree, uttara refused, but as arjuna said there are only bows in that tree and no corpse, he climbed up and unwrapped and untied the bows . arjuna explained to him to whom the different bows belonged, first mentioning the gaandiva, which is honoured by the gods, the daanavas, and the gandharvas . he then revealed to uttara that they were the paandavas and confirmed it by telling his ten names . arjuna took off the bracelets from his arms, etc recalled to his mind all his weapons, and twanged the gaandiva with a dreadful sound, whence the kurus knew that he was arjuna, then he comforted uttara by mentioning his former exploits and his preceptors in arms . having taken n the banner with the figure of a lion he set up his own flagstaff bearing the figure of an ape with a lions tail, which was a celestial illusion contrived by vishva karman himself, for as soon as he thought of the gift of agni, agni ordered the superhuman creatures to take their usual place on that banner, which then fell n from the air on his chariot . drona concluded from various omens that it was arjuna . duryodhana repeated to bhishma, drona, and kripa, his and karnas opinion, that arjuna must have broken his pledge, and asked bhishma to calculate the time. karna blamed drona for praising arjuna, and declared that he would throw arjuna n from his chariot that very day . kripa blamed karna and warned him from fighting alone with arjuna, mentioning his exploits they ought all to fight with arjuna and not karna alone . ashvatthaaman blamed karna for his vain boast and declared that he would not fight with arjuna . bhishma tried to mediate between ashvatthaaman and kripa on one side and karna on the other side he was of opinion that fight they must, and therefore this was not the time for quarrel. the braahmaastra and the vedas are never to be seen combined anywhere else than in drona . he was supported by ashvatthaaman and duryodhana. drona said let such arrangements be made that arjuna may not be able to approach duryodhana in battle, and that duryodhana may not be captured by the foe . having calculated the time, bhishma declared that the paandavas had not broken the pledge. duryodhana said will not give back the king to the paandavas. bhishma proposed that duryodhana should proceed towards the capital with one fourth of the army, and that one fourth should escort the kine, while he, drona, karna, ashvatthaaman, and kripa should withstand the foes. this proposal was accepted bhishma placed drona in the centre, ashvatthaaman on the left wing, kripa on the right wing, and karna in the van, and would himself stand in the rear . drona recognized the top of arjunas banner, etc. arjuna directed uttara to the spot where duryodhana was the soldiers became so con founded that they could not even fly, and the kine turned back along the southern road . as arjuna was advancing towards duryodhana the kurus fell upon him, especially karna, who was supported by citrasena, sangraa majit, shatrusaha, jaya, and vikarna vikarna fled shatruntapa and many others were slain by arjuna, so also sangraamajit at last karna took to flight . duryodhana, etc attacked arjuna arjuna shot at drona, dusaha, ashvatthaaman, dushaasana, and kripa, and wounded bhishma, duryodhana, and karna. then arjuna described to uttara the banners, etc of kripa, drona, ashvatthaaman, duryodhana, karna, and bhishma . indra, the gods, the vishvas, the ashvins, the maruts, the yakshas, the gandharvas, the mahoragas, the naagas, the raakshasas, the serpents, the pitris, and the maharshis came to see the combat, likewise, sitting on the chariot of indra, king vasumanas, etc. also agni, shiva, soma, varuna, prajaapati, dhaatri, vidhaatri, kubera, yama, alambusha, ugrasena, tumburu, etc came there . arjuna attacked kripa, announced his name, and blew the devadatta at last kripa was led away by his soldiers . drona attacked arjuna arjuna said will not strike thee unless thou strikest me first with his own weapons arjuna baffled the aindra, vaayavya, and aagneya weapons, which were shot by drona a voice was heard in the sky applauding drona then ashvatthaaman attacked arjuna, which gave drona an opportunity to leave the field . ashvatthaaman cut off the string of the gaandiva and was applauded by the gods, and by drona, bhishma, karna, and kripa. arjuna attached a fresh string to the gaandiva. as ashvatthaamans arrows became exhausted karna attacked arjuna, who challenged him to a single combat and rebuked him, because he had fled after the slaughter of his younger brother. at last karna, wounded, fled in a northern direction . then arjuna ordered uttara to take him to bhishma uttara became afraid and was comforted by arjuna, who enumerated some of his exploits and weapons. dushaasana, vikarna, dusaha, and vivimshati rushed towards arjuna dushaasana fled vikarna fell n dusaha and vivimshati were taken away by their warriors . at last the kauravas fled duryodhana, karna, and dushaasana attempted in vain to defeat arjuna . then bhishma and arjuna fought with the praajaapatya, aindra, aagneya, raudra, kaubera, vaaruna, yaamya, and vaayavya weapons the gandharva citrasena showed the two combatants to indra, who showered celestial flowers n upon them at last bhishma, wounded, lost consciousness and was led away by his charioteer . duryodhana and then vikarna attacked arjuna vikarna ran back and ascended the chariot of vivimshati duryodhana was wounded and fled, and so did all the warriors . stung by the censure of arjuna, duryodhana returned, and karna, bhishma, drona, kripa, vivimshati, and dushaasana rushed forwards to protect duryodhana. arjuna employed the weapon sammohana which he had obtained from indra, and blew his conch so that the kurus were deprived of their senses. then he caused uttara to take away the white garments of drona and kripa, the yellow ones of karna, and the blue ones of duryodhana and ashvatthaaman, but not those of bhishma, because he had not been stupefied. arjuna wounded bhishma, who told duryodhana to go back to his city, which they all did arjuna followed them for a while and worshipped bhishma, drona, ashvatthaaman, and kripa then he, with an arrow, broke the crown of duryodhana and blew the devadatta. then he ordered uttara to turn back. the gods returned to their respective abodes . a large number of kuru soldiers issuing from the forest stood before arjuna with joined palms and were spared. arjuna said to uttara do not eulogize the paandavas, but say that the feat is thy own. then he replaced the weapons on the shami tree the monkey ascended to the sky, together with the other creatures on the flagstaff, the illusion melted away, and uttaras own banner was replaced upon the chariot. arjuna entered the city in the guise of brihannalaa, having sent the cowherds to announce the victory . viraata entered his city, followed by the four paandavas, and dispatched an army to protect uttara, though yudhishthira said that, protected by brihannalaa, he was able to vanquish even the gods, the asuras, the siddhas, and the yakshas. meanwhile the messengers of uttara came and viraata ordered the highways to be decorated, etc and began to play at dice with yudhishthira, who again repeatedly praised brihannalaa. viraata struck yudhishthira with a die, but the blood was prevented from falling on the ground and was washed away by krishnaa, who also, at the injunction of yudhishthira, let uttara enter alone, that brihannalaa should not see him bleeding. uttara prevailed upon viraata to ask yudhishthiras par. when the bleeding had stopped, brihannalaa entered . uttara said all this has been accomplished by a devaputra who then disappeared. arjuna gave to uttaraa the garments he had brought .
gokarna1, name of a tirtha belonging to shiva .
gokarnaa, a maatri. u, .
gokula, name of a place .
golaangula, pl a kind of monkey .
goloka . b, . gautama said next blaze eternal reent regions, free from passion and sorrow, the world of kine, difficult to attain. dhritaraashtra said he who possessing, kine gives away every year, etc the brahmans who grow old practising brahmacarya, who obey the declarations of the vedas, and, endued with intelligence, betake themselves to tirthayaatraas, dwell here in felicity likewise those who repair to prabhaasa, etc .
gomahishadaa, a maatri. u, .
gomanda, v. gomanta2.
gomanta1, a mountain .
gomanta2, a mountain on krauncadvipa .
gomanta, pl a people .
gomati, a river. b, . b, . b, . m, . b, .
gomukha1, a king .
gomukha2, the son of maatali .
gonanda, a warrior of skanda. u, .
gopa, pl. = naaraayana, pl .
gopaala, pl. = naaraayana, pl .
gopaalakaksha, a country .
gopaalakaksha, pl a people .
gopaali, an apsaras .
gopaali, a maatri. u, .
goparaashtra, pl a people .
gopati1, a gandharva .
gopati3, a prince. b, .
gopati5, a son of shibi. b, .
goprataara1, a tirtha on the sarayu .
goraashva, v. gauraashva.
goratha, a mountain near girivraja .
gostani, a maatri. u, .
gotama, a rishi . b, . dirghatamas.
govardhana1, a mountain .
govardhana2, name of a banyan tree in the country of the baahikas .
govaasa, pl. = govaasana, pl .
govaasana, pl. .
govinda2, a mountain in krauncadvipa .
govitata, a kind of horse sacrifice, .
govraja, a warrior of skanda. u, .
graha1, mostly pl. . of special planets budha, . shanaishcara, . shukra, . shveta, . raahu, .
graha2 sg. and pl b .
graha3, pl. = shiva .
graamani, a follower of shiva .
graamaniya, pl. .
gridhra, pl. .
. b bhishma related the young child of a brahman died and was taken to the burning place a vulture caused the lamenting kinsmen to leave the child, as the sun was soon to set, saying that the child could not be revived by their lingering. a jackal, black as a raven, rebuked them for not waiting till the sun had set, as the child might possibly revive. the vulture and the jackal alternately endeavoured to persuade them. the jackal mentioned that by raamas slaying the shudra named shambuka, a brahmana child was restored to life similarly the son of r. ri. shveta. the vulture said that if only rudra, etc would grant him a boon, the child might come back to life, and mentioned the spirits and y. and raa etc who haunt the burning place, while the jackal reminded them that it was here on this quiet and peaceful spot that the pitris by thousands took leave of the world. the jackal and the vulture continued to dispute, exhausted with hunger and thirst, wishing to get opportunity of devouring the child. then shankara exhorted by his consort came, and, taking up a quantity of water in his hands, restored the child to life for a hundred years, and to the jackal and the vulture he granted a boon, in consequence of which their hunger was appeased. blessing upon the reader .
gridhrakuta, a mountain. b, .
gridhrapatra, a warrior of skanda. u
gridhravata, a tirtha .
grihaanaam pravibhaaga .
gritsamada, a rishi . b, .
guha, pl a people .
guhya, pl. = guhyaka, pl .
guhyaka, pl a class of beings, followers of kubera . bis, . b, . b, . b, . c, . guhya, pl.
guhyaka, sg .
guhyaka, name of a yaksha .
gunakeshi, the daughter of maatali .
gunamukhyaa, an apsaras .
gunaavaraa, an apsaras .
guptaka, one of the standard bearers of jayadratha .
gurubhaara, a suparna, the son of garuda .
. g krishna said asked by his disciple whence am whence art thou etc the preceptor said this was declared by brahmaan himself to ri. it was known to the conclaves of si. in the ancient kalpas. in days of old ri. brihaspati, etc. assembled together for asking one another, tired with their acts placing ri. aangirasa at their head, they beheld, in the abode of brahmaan, brahmaan free from sin, and were instructed by him about how a good man should act, about emancipation, etc. truth is the universe of being, light, ether, sun, wind, indra and prajaapati are not seen as long as one has not attained to adhyaatma religion has faith for its indication the number of elements are twenty four and one more . brahmaan discoursed on the city of nine gates, the three qualities, etc the qualities belonging to darkness ri mu and . become deluded, desirous of pleasure . brahmaan discoursed on passion and sattva the qualities are not completely separated from one another, etc. from the unmanifest first sprang the great soul, the source of all intelligence, the source of all qualities, called mahaan aatmaa, vishnu, jishnu, shambhu, buddhi, etc pervading everything in the universe, stationed in the heart of all, endued with minuteness, lightness, and affluence this is said to be the first creation the great, who was first produced and called ahankaara, is the second creation, the source of all creatures, a god, the creator of gods, etc. from ahankaaraa was born the five great elements the praanas, etc. the eleven organs sprung from ahankaara entity . on the self . among objects . among gods . . ether . ear ... sound ... the quarters . . wind . skin ... objects of touch ... lightning . . light . eye ... form and colour ... the sun . . water . tongue ... taste ... soma. . earth . nose ... scent ... the wind . . feet ... motion ... vishnu. . apaana... anus ... excreta ... mitra. . organ of generation ... vital seed ... prajaapati. . hands ... actions ... shakra . . speech ... what is spoken ... vahni . . mind ... mental operation ... the moon . . egoism . consciousness of self ... rudra. . understanding what is to be understood ... brahmaan. three are the seats of all existent objects land, water, and ether the mode of birth is fourfold etc. on the means of attaining to brahmaan on the body the emancipated one is vishnu, etc. him praise brahmans, as y psh p birds, raa bh and m. ri. the kshatriya, elephant, lion, sheep, snake, bull, and male are of middle quality the nyagrodha, etc. are the foremost among trees himavat, etc. are the foremost among mountains m. are the foremost of the ganas, etc. the day was first, then arose the night, etc. the months are said to begin with the bright fortnights the constellations begin with shravana the seasons with winter, etc. on the wheel of life on the duties that men should observe on renunciation, knowledge, and power on the different conceptions of braahman it is impossible to attain to purusha by any other means than goodness some assert the unity of kshetrajna and sattva this is not correct the relation of purusha to sattva is like that of the gnat to the udumbara, or that of water drops on the leaf of a lotus. the ri. once more asked about the diversities of practice observed by men, and about the connection between the kshetrajna and sattva . brahmaan, quoting what was said by a preceptor to a disciple, said that abstention from harming any creature is the foremost of all duties, and the relation between sattva and kshetrajna is that of the object to the subject, or like that of the matter to the maker, or like that of a lamp to him who lights it sattva is manifest, while purusha is unmanifest knowledge is indispensable for attaining to felicity from pradhaana develops mahat, from mahat ahankaara, from ahankaara the five elements the qualities of the elements are the following elements. qualities. ether sound. wind touch sound. light rupa touch sound. water taste rupa touch sound. earth smell taste rupa touch sound. . agreeable . white . rough . shadja. . disagreeable . dark . cold . rishabha. . sweet . sweet . red . hot . gaandhaara. . sour . sour . blue . tender . madhyama. . pungent . pungent . yellow . hard . pancama. . diffusive . bitter . grey . smooth . nishaada. . compact . astringent . short . slippery . dhaivata. . oily . saline . long . oily . agreeable. . dry . minute . painful . disagreeable. . clear . gross . clear . compact. . square . soft . circular . space is the highest of the elements ahankaara buddhi aatman the unmanifest avyaktam purusha . brahmaan said the body is called the carriage of braahman, on which the individual soul drives about the senses are the steeds the mind is the charioteer, called also the bhutaatman, because it is the ruler of the elements the reins are the buddhi, called also kshetrajna, because it proclaims power. the order of the dissolution is, the creatures, their qualities, the elements men, g psh as and raa. have all sprung from nature, and not from actions, nor from a cause the brahmans, who are creators of the universe are born here again and again all that springs from them is dissolved in those very five great elements like billows in the ocean those elements that compose the universe are the five great elements, and higher than these is the way of the emancipated prajaapati created all this by the mind alone in the same manner ri. attained to . by the aid of penance different degrees of bliss after death, according as one performs acts with expectation, being full of egoism, or is devoid of selfishness, and freed from egoism through yoga freed from darkness and passion and adhering only to goodness, one becomes released from every sin and creates all things such a one should be known to be kshetrajna he who knows him knows the veda that which begins with the unmanifest and ends with the gross qualities, has ignorance for its indication selfishness is death, the reverse is the eternal the high minded ancients never applaud action by action a creature is born with body the indication of tranquillity is like what takes place in a dream this is the goal of the emancipated ones who are intent on knowledge. the preceptor said thus addressed by brahmaan, mu. acted accordingly and attained to felicity . krishna said the pupil acted accordingly and then attained to emancipation .
guruskandha, a mountain. g, .
haahaa, a gandharva always mentioned to gether with huhu . b, .
haidambi, v. haidimbi.
haidimba1, adj. .
haihaya, pl a people . b it is heard that the brahmans, raising a standard of kusha grass, encountered the kshatriyas of the haihaya clan in battle the vaishyas and the shudras joined the brahmans. in the battles, however, the three castes repeatedly broke n, while the kshatriyas, though alone, vanquished their large army because they obeyed the commands of only one person, while the other three castes acted each according to his individual understanding. the brahmans then appointed one among themselves as their commander, and thus succeeded in vanquishing the kshatriyas, . b, . b, .
haihaya1, a son of vatsa. b, . vitahavya.
haima1, a mountain. b, .
haimavata2, adj. . i, . u, .
haimavata, pl. . haimavatika, pl.
haimavati, the wife of kaushika .
haimavati, one of the wives of krishna .
haimavatika, pl. . haimavata, pl.
hairanvati, a river .
hairanyaka, name of a varsha .
halika, a serpent .
halimaa, a maatri .
halimaka, a serpent .
hamsa2, a gandharva king, the son of arishtaa .
hamsa3, follower of jaraasandha .
hamsa, pl. .
hamsacuda, a yaksha .
hamsaja, a warrior of skanda. u, .
. there lived on the other side of the ocean a rich vaishya with many children, kind to all creatures. a crow lived upon the refuse of the dishes set before these children. the crow, becoming arrogant, came to disregard all birds. once, certain swans, having their abodes in the maanasa lake, came to that side of the ocean. the crow challenged their leader, saying that he would display different kinds of motion, ng every yojanas in a separate kind of motion rising up and swooping n, etc. one of the swans said that they knew but that one kind of motion that all birds know, at which the assembled crows laughed aloud. the swans in vain tried to dissuade the crow. they began to fly. beholding the diverse kinds of flight of the crow, the crows loudly rejoiced, while the swans laughed in mockery. for a moment the swan, with that one kind of slow motion, seemed to yield to the crow. as the swan flew westwards to the ocean, the crow was anxious and became almost senseless at not seeing any islands or trees whereon to perch when tired. at last the swan asked what is this kind of flight that thou hast now ated thou touchest the waters with thy wings and beak repeatedly. the crow suddenly fell n, and imploring the swan, prevailed upon him to take him on his back and carry him to the shore, and promised never to disregard others.
hamsakaayana, pl a people .
hamsakuta, a mountain .
hamsamaarga, pl a people . hamsapatha.
hamsapada, v. hamsapatha.
hamsapatha, pl a people . hamsamaarga.
hamsaprapatana, a tirtha .
hamsavaktra, a warrior of skanda. u
hamsi, a daughter of bhagiratha .
hamsikaa, a celestial cow, daughter of surabhi .
hanumad bhima samvaada . hanumat said that he was the son of vaayu with the wife of kesharin, and the friend of the suns son sugriva, who, together with shakras son vaalin, used to be waited upon by all monkeys further, that sugriva had been driven out by his brother, and dwelt for a long time with hanumat at rishyamuka, when raama daasharathi, who was vishnu in human shape, with his wife and younger brother resided in the dandaka forest, and the raakshasa raavana carried away sitaa, raamas queen, from janasthaana, assisted by the raakshasa maarica, in the form of a deer marked with gems and gold . raama slew vaalin and installed sugriva in the king sugriva sent monkeys to inquire after sitaa, and according to the communi cations of the vulture sampaati, hanumat crossed the ocean, extending over yojanas, saw sitaa in the abode of raavana, burnt lankaa, and returned to raama. raama constructed a bridge across the deep, and, followed by myriads of monkeys, he slew raavana, his brother, sons, and kindred, together with all the raakshasas, and installed the pious raakshasa chief vibhishana in the king in lankaa, and then returned with sitaa to his city ayodhyaa, and was established in the king. raama granted to hanumat that he should live as long as the history of raamas deeds is remembered on earth. raama went to his own abode after having reigned, years. from that time all excellent objects of entertainment were, through the grace of sitaa, supplied to hanumat, who constantly stayed there hearing the deeds of raama sung by apsarases and gandharvas . he had obstructed this path of the gods to bhima with the view that none might defeat or curse him . when bhima asked hanumat to show him the form he had when crossing the ocean, hanumat declared this to be impossible, as all things diminish according to the different yugas, even the siddhas, gods, and great rishis. then he described the krita yuga and the tretaa, dvaapara, and kaliyuga . hanumat was prevailed upon to grant the request of bhima, and showed himself as great as the vindhya or the mainaaka mountain, and said that he might become as long as he wished he had himself been able to slay raavana, but would not obscure the glory of raama. he pointed out to bhima the way to the saugandhika vana and the garden of kubera, which was guarded by yakshas and raakshasas, and warned him against plucking the flowers himself, delivering a discourse upon the duties of the four castes, etc. .
hanumat or hanumat, name of a monkey, the son of vaayu . h, . also the following synonyms anilaatmaja, . maarutaatmaja, . pavanaatmaja, . vaayuputra, . vaayutanaya, .
hanumatpratyaagamana . raama and lakshmana were dwelling on the mountain maalyavat. raama sent lakshmana to kishkindhyaa to threaten sugriva. sugriva, however, said that he had despatched monkeys in all directions to find out sitaa. after a month those who had been sent to the north, the east, and the west returned. after two months hanumat, angada, etc returned from the south, after having pillaged madhuvana . hanumat told that in a cavern of the palace of maya the ascetic prabhaavati had shown them the way on the shore they had seen the mountains sahya, malaya, and dardura, then they had met sampaati, the brother of jataayu, and had informed him of everything sampaati then had directed them to lankaa, whereafter hanumat had crossed the ocean and slain the raakshasi of the water, and had been recognized by sitaa from the words of avindhya sitaa had given him a jewel as a credential and told him, as a token, that raama on the mountain citrakuta had shot a blade of grass at a crow hanumat then had caused himself to be seized by the soldiers of raavana, and set fire to lankaa.
hanyamaana, pl a people, .
hara1, an asura .
hara2, shiva, q.v.
hara3, a rudra .
haraahara, an asura .
haarahuna, pl a people . huna, pl.
. krishna said that arjuna had not insulted their family, but had rather enhanced their respect, and prevailed upon them that they, by conciliation, brought arjuna back to dvaarakaa, where he was united in marriage with subhadraa and passed a whole year. the last time of his exile he passed in pushkara. after the twelve years were complete he came back to khaandavaprastha. draupadi at first was jealous, but then embraced subhadraa. krishna visited them at indraprastha with raama, akrura daanapati, anaadhrishti, uddhava, satyaka and saatyaki, and kritavarman saatvata, and pradyumna, shaamba, nishatha, shanku, caarudeshna, jhillin, viprithu, saarana, gada, etc bringing with them many nuptial presents. yudhishthira sent the twins out to receive them. krishna gave them, kine from the country of mathuraa, and baalhika horses as kanyaadhana, etc. raama gave arjuna as a wedding present, elephants. having spent many days in sports and merriment there, the vrishnis returned to dvaaravati with raama in the van, carrying with them the gems that had been given them by yudhishthira. but krishna remained with arjuna at indraprashtha, and they went a hunting over the borders of the yamunaa. subhadraa brought forth abhimanyu, so called because he was fearless and wrathful . upon his birth yudhishthira gave away, kine and nishkas to the brahmans. the child became the favourite of vaasudeva, etc and acquired from his father the dhanurveda . paancali also obtained five sons prativindhya, sutasoma, shrutakarman, shataanika, shrutasena. they were born each at the interval of one year. their jaatakarman, cuda, and upanayana were performed by dhaumya. after having studied the vedas they acquired from arjuna knowledge of all weapons celestial and human .
haardikya2, a prince .
hari2, a raakshasa .
hari3, a suparna, the son of garuda .
hari4, the son of akampana . b, .
hari5, an asura, the son of taarakaaksha .
hari6, a paandava warrior .
hari7, a warrior of skanda. u, .
hari, pl the horses of indra, .
hari, a daughter of krodhavashaa .
haribabhru, a muni .
harishcandra, an ancient king . b h. is the only king who lives in the palace of indra, and the reason is that h. had formerly brought the whole earth with its seven islands under his sway, and had performed the raajasuya sacrifice, to which all the kings of the earth brought wealth at his command, and having concluded the raajasuya, he was installed in the sovereignty of the earth . all princes who perform a raajasuya or are slain in battle without turning their backs, or yield up their lives after severe ascetic penances, attain to the region of indra, .
harishmashru1, a rishi .
harishraavaa, a river .
haridraka, a serpent .
harigiri, a mountain on kushadvipa .
harimat1, a rite .
harimedhas, an ancient king .
harina1, a serpent .
harina2, name of an ichneumon, v. harita.
harinaashva, a prince .
haripindaa, a maatri. u, .
harita1, name of an ichneumon. b, .
haarita, a muni . haarita.
haarita, a muni .
harivamsha, the appendix of mhbhr . c, .
harivarsha, name of a varsha .
harsha, a son of dharma .
haryashva1, king of ayodhyaa .
haryashva2, king of the kaashis, father of sudeva and grand father of divodaasa. b, .
hasana, a warrior of skanda. u, .
hasini, an apsaras. b, .
hasta, a nakshatra . saavitra.
hastibhadra, a serpent .
hastikaashyapa, a rishi .
. b bhishma said a brahman gautama nursed an infant elephant that had lost its mother, till it was ten years old, huge as a hill, etc. he looked upon it as a son, and it brought him his fuel and water. indra, in the shape of king dhritaraashtra, seized this young elephant, offering to give to gautama great riches instead what use can brahmans have of elephants . gautama said he would take the elephant from him even in, mandaakini, the woods of meru, nandana, uttaraa kurava, praajaa patyaa lokaa, svayambhubhavana, the world of the somapithin dhritaraashtra, as regards c k, said that he would go to higher regions, and as regards l n, that he would not go there having mentioned, gautama recognized indra they asked each others benediction indra returned the elephant, and as gautama alone of all ri. had been able to recognize him, he took gautama and the elephant with him and proceeded to heaven .
hastin1, a son of the elder dhritaraashtra .
hastin2, a son of suhotra .
haastinapura, the capital of the kurus, on the river gangaa . gajaahvaya, gajapura, gajasaahvaya, naagaahvaya, naaga pura, naagasaahvaya, vaaranaahvaya, vaaranasaahvaya.
hastipaada, a serpent .
hastipinda, a serpent .
hastisomaa, a river .
haataka, a country .
haataka, pl the inhabitants of haataka .
havana, a rudra .
havidhra, an ancient king .
havishravas, a son of the elder dhritaraashtra .
havirdhaaman. b, .
havishmat, a rishi .
havishmati, a daughter of angiras .
haya, pl a family .
hayashiras, a form of vishnu . b, . ashvashiras, hayamukha, vadavaamukha.
hayagriva1, a videha king .
hayagriva2, an asura .
hayagriva3, an ancient king. b the ancient king h after having slain a large number of his foes in battle, was himself defeated and slain, being once without a follower at his side. he acquired great fame from the battles he fought. this was his sacrifice, and having com pleted it by yielding up his life breaths, he is now sporting in the regions of the gods. he protected his king, performed sacrifices, was possessed of learning, etc. he drank soma in the sacrifices, gratified the brahmans, etc therefore he won heaven, .
hemaa, a river .
hemashringa, a mountain. b, .
hemaguha, a serpent .
hemakampana, a kuru warrior .
hemakuta. b on the mountain h. the utterance of words caused the gathering of clouds and stones by thousands. there the recitation of the sacred scriptures was heard, but nobody was seen in the evening and the morning there was seen fire, and biting flies would interrupt the austerities. lomasha explained that formerly on this rishabhakuta dwelt a great and resentful rishi, who was many hundred years old, and was named rishabha. when practising austerities he had been spoken to by others, and in wrath he ordered the mountain to throw stones on him who should utter any word there, and forbade the wind to make any noise. therefore, as soon as a man utters any word here he is forbidden by a roaring cloud. formerly, when the gods came to the nandaa, many men came to see them, but the gods with indra at their head did not like to be seen, and therefore they rendered the spot inaccessible by raising obstructions in the form of mountains, and from that day onwards men could not see that hill, far less ascend it. lomasha further said here all the gods performed the best sacrifices, and the marks thereof may be seen to this the grass resembling kusha grass, and many trees resembling yupas the gods and rishis dwell there to this and it is their fire which is seen in the evening and the morning. by bathing here ones sins are destroyed, .
hemanetra, a yaksha .
hemapunjaka, a kuru warrior .
hemavarna1, a suparna, the son of garuda .
hemavarna2, the son of rocamaana .
herambaka, pl a people .
hidimba, a raakshasa, slain by bhimasena .
hidimbaa, a raakshasi, sister of hidimba and by bhimasena, mother of ghatotkaca .
. not far from that place dwelt on a shaala tree the raakshasa hidimba, a cannibal with eight long and sharp pointed teeth, etc. scenting the or of man, he sent his sister hidimbaa to slaughter them and bring them unto him. she fell in love with bhima, and, assuming a beautiful form, she asked him to become her husband, and promised to rescue him and his brothers and mother from her brother but bhima refused to awaken them . seeing that his sister did not return soon enough, hidimba proceeded quickly to the spot, and, abusing his sister, he rushed at her, but was seized by bhima and dragged to a distance, lest his yells should awaken the brothers of bhima fighting they broke n the trees, etc and at those sounds the paandavas woke up with their mother, and saw hidimbaa sitting before them . she made herself and her love for bhima known to them. arjuna offered to assist bhima but bhima refused. arjuna then said the morning twilight is about to set in during the twilights raakshasas become stronger kill him without delay. then bhima threw the raakshasa to the ground, and he, dying, sent forth a terrible yell then he bled up his body and broke it in the middle. arjuna thought there was a town not far off. thereto they proceeded, followed by hidimbaa . bhima would also have slain hidimbaa, but was prevented by yudhishthira. it was agreed upon, that she should have bhima for her husband, until she got a son, sporting with him during the but bringing him back every evening. she then flew away with him, and sported with him on mountains, etc until she had brought forth
hika, a pishaaca .
himavat, the himalaya mountains . b, . d, . . c, . i, . u, . z, . aa, . b, . b, . f, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, gire, father of umaa, whom he bestowed upon shivabhrigu therefore cursed h that it should have no gems, . g, . b, . z, . b, . b, . b, . b, . f, . g, . c, . also the following synonyms shailaguru, . shailaraaj, . shailaraaja, . shailendra, . giriraaj, . giriraaja, . himaalaya, q.v.
hiranmaya1, a rishi .
hiranmaya2, a varsha. i to the south of nila and the north of nishadha is the varsha h. with the river hairanvati it is the abode of garuda, the people are all followers of the yakshas, wealthy, and handsome, of great strength and cheerful, their life lasting for, years. the three summits are beautiful one is made of jewels, another of gold, and the third of all kinds of gems, and aned with palaces there the self luminous goddess shaandili always lives, .
hiranmaya4 mahaapurusha .
hiranvati, name of a river .
hiranyabaahu1, a serpent .
hiranyabindu, a tirtha . d by stirring the waters of h. and reverencing the god, who lies in the kusha grass, one is cleansed of his sins, .
hiranyashikhara, a mountain . the next.
hiranyashringa, a mountain . the preceding.
hiranyadhanus, king of the nishaadas and father of ekalavya .
hiranyahasta, a brahman .
hiranyakashipu, an asura . c, . d, . b, . f, . b, cursed by vasishtha and slain aanushaasanik.sarvaamaraishvaryam
hiranyaakhya, v. hiranyaaksha.
hiranyaaksha1, an asura . b, .
hiranyaaksha2, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
hiranyapura, a city of the asuras . d, . daanavapura.
hiranyavarman1, king of the dashaarnas.
hotravaahana1, a brahmarshi .
hotravaahana2, a raajarshi .
hrada, pl. . u, .
hraada, a serpent .
. the followers of shakuni attacked the paandavas arjuna and bhimasena came to the rescue of sahadeva arjuna slew them duryo dhana rallied the remnants of his chariots, etc and urged them against the paandavas and dhrishtadyumna they were exterminated in a moment by the paandavas and the srinjayas. only duryodhana remained alive. requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya recounted the numbers of the remnants of the paandava army. duryodhana abaned his slain steeds and fled away on foot without a companion, towards a lake, taking up his mace, recalling the words of vidura. the paandavas with arjuna baffled the kurus. in duryodhanas army no great chariot warrior was alive save ashvatthaaman, etc. . urged by dhrishtadyumna, saatyaki was about to slay sanjaya but vyaasa came and caused him to be let off alive. he met with duryodhana, whom he told the state of things, and who asked him to inform dhritaraashtra. then duryodhana, having charmed the waters, entered the lake. sanjaya then met with ashvatthaaman, etc and informed them they fled away, at sight of the paandavas, to the kuru camp, taking sanjaya up in the chariot of kripa. the sun had set a little before. the outposts of the camp wept aloud. the old men proceeded towards the city with the princesses also the camp guards fled towards the city, and so did also the cowherds, etc from fear of bhimasena. yuyutsu reflected . with the permission of yudhishthira he supervised the removal of the ladies. the sun was setting. having entered haastinapura with the ladies, he informed vidura urged by vidura, he passed that night in his own abode, while vidura went to the cheerless mansion of dhritaraashtra . requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related the paandavas wandered over the field in search of duryodhana tired, they took rest in their camp with all their soldiers. then ashvatthaaman, etc. proceeded towards the lake and urged duryodhana to fight with them against yudhishthira. duryodhana said that he would rest for that night and fight the next morning. ashvatthaaman swore to slay the paandavas and all the paancaalas in this night. certain hunters who used every day to procure a basketful of meat for bhimasena overheard the conversation between duryodhana and ashvatthaaman, etc and informed bhimasena. the paandavas all started towards the lake hearing the noise caused by them ashvatthaaman, etc took leave from duryodhana and went away, and stopped under a banyan . krishna advised yudhishthira to slay duryodhana by putting forth his own powers of illusion . yudhishthira tauntingly addressed duryodhana for having fled from battle duryodhana said that he had entered the lake not from fear, but in order to take rest. yudhishthira asked duryodhana to come out immediately and fight his foes. he answered that his king might be taken by his foes, his own desire being to enter the woods and retire from the world yudhishthira taunted him for such an answer, refusing to take the king in gift from one who was unable to retain it by might .
hraara, a daitya. u, .
hri . u, .
hrimat, a vishvadeva .
hrinisheva, a daitya. b, .
hridika, father of kritavarman .
hridika, pl the family of kritavarman .
hridya, a rishi .
hrishikesha, pl. a class of beings .
huhu, a gandharva always mentioned together with haahaa, q.v.
huna, pl a people . haara huna, pl.
hunda, pl a people .
isha4, the supreme being, in general, .
isha5, a vishvadeva .
ishaanaadhyushita, a tirtha .
ishvara7, a son of puru .
ishvara8, a prince .
ishvara9, name of a rudra .
ishvara1, a vishvadeva .
ihaamriga, pl. .
ijaka, pl a people .
ijika, pl v. ijaka, pl.
ikshulaa, a river .
ikshumaalavi, a river .
ikshumati, a river in kurukshetra .
ikshvaaku1, an ancient king, the son or great grandson of manu vaivasvata . b, . b, learnt the religion from manu, cf sudar shanop.the son of manu and the father of sons, among whom dashaashva was the tenthaanushaasanik.vamshajo raajaa saudaasa, i.e. kalmaashapaadaamong the kings who did not eat meat during the month of kaarttikaenumerationsamvartta maruttiyason of kshupa and grandson of prasandhi, the son of manufather of sons, among whom vimsha was the eldest
ikshvaaku2, pl. .
ikshvaaku3, sg. = kuvalaashva, .
ikshvaaku4, sg. = brihadashva, .
ikshvaaku5, sg. = haryashva, .
ilaa, the daughter of manu vaivasvata and the mother of pururavas . b, . b, . sudyumna.
ilaaspada, a tirtha .
ilaavrita, name of a varsha .
ilina, an ancient king .
ilvala, an asura, the brother of vaataapi . asura, daiteya, daitya, daityendra, daanava.
indra, the chief of the devas, lord of rain, esp. named shakra how indra slew vishvarupa and vritra, nahushas becoming king of the gods and falling n again to the earth, .s regaining the sovereignty, b, .sudarshanop.vapusha, sc. durjayasya, .bhangaa svanop.agnistutam dvishtamdiscourse between . and bhangaasvanaaanushaasanik.devaa sendraa c, .aanushaasanik. .upamanyu yajnendrabalarakshasu, so c but b. reads yakshendraciva in the shape of . brahmendra mahendra vishnusahitaa devaa, so c but b. has hutaasha instead of mahendraaayudhasavarnaabham dhanuaanushaa sanik.aayudhapinaddhaankamaagni marutaam...gati, i.e. shivaskandendrau, identified with shivakalpena, sc. tandin, devai sendrai b, .vitahavyop.rupenendra ivaapara, sc. gritsamadaaanushaa sanik.sendraas trayo lokaa, . b, .aanushaasanik.brihaspatesh ca samvaadam sya, discourse between . and brihaspati discourse between . and brahmaanpitaamahasya samvaadam sya cadiscourse between . and brahman about kinesuvarnotpattipage3 a sendreshu lokeshudevai...sendrai b, . b, .shapathavidhinahushop.indro ham, sc. nahushakarishye nindram, sc. nahushamanindratvam nahusha became but cursed to become a serpent he fell n to the earth, also b, .indralokasya lokaaaanushaasanik.ena guhyam nihitam vai guhaayaam, i.e. the vow of fast, nil.kanyaadhirudhan ca vimaanam labhate nara, umaa maheshvarasamv.purvena vadanenaaham tvam anushaasmi ha, says shivaena ca puraa vajram kshiptam shrikaankshinaa mama dagdhvaa kanthan tu tad yaatam tena shrikanthataa mama, says shivaaanushaasanik.sendraa devaas trayastrimshatthe eleventh of the aadityas e, .vasishthasendraa...tridivaukasa, protected by vasishthacyavanacyavana paralysed the arm of . and created mada. . then allowed the ashvins to become partakers of the soma, kapa, pl.sendraa divaukasa, when the gods had entered the mouth of mada, cyavana took away from them the earthshiva shiva identified with .avikshitaad anavara, sc. avikshitsama, sc. avikshitsamvartta maruttiyavaasavo py asuraan sarvaan nirjitya ca nipaatya ca tvam praapya lokeshu tato vavre purohitam, sc. brihaspatitvam praaptavaan eko, says indra .s relations to brihaspati, samvarta, and maruttavritrasya saha vritrena yuddham, .s encounter with vritrabraahmanagitaagurushishyasamv marutaam raajaa b, in the shape of a brahman . assisted uttanka, .agastyaagastya caused . to pour n rainaashramavaasap.samaa, sc. the paandavas, .mahaaprasthaanikap. put yudhishthira to the testsvargaarohanap.sankaasham, sc. arjuna. put yudhishthira to the testdevaraatau, i.e. indra and vishnupage3 b shatakratuto be worshipped in amaraanaam hradasainyasaprabhamjushtaan...lokaankalpayaadrik puraa vrittam shambara yo, sc. yuddhamyathaa purvam abhud yuddham shambara yotridivam ivaa rakshitamtejasaasadrishau yuddhe shambara yoyaadrisho vai puraa vritta shambara yoivaivacf. additionsthe husband of shacisahasraakshavajrahastasahasraa ksham, c. has by error sdeva raajasamam, sc. dronamir ivaasuraanshakrasyadeveshavaasavamshakramfather of arjunasuryaupratimatejasasama, sc. bhagadattapraised in the hymn vv. b bhavane ...shsyasya yajna shatasankhyavajrapaanir yathaayathaa sho brihaspate, sc. aasanam kalpayaam aasayathaadevaa shpurogaaotsavenaaadayaone of the aadityasadite putraa shmukhyaasamsadamyathaa sho marutpativishnu ivaaparaubalahaapratimatejasafather of arjunapratimatejasaa, i.e. shaantanubegot arjunaamong the fathers of the paandavasdhvajam ivocchritam, c. has by error sashobhata...cenevaamaraavatipratimam, i.e. arjunasyaamsha paandava savyasaaci, i.e. arjunaprakhyaanaayudhasamauivaprayayau...yathaa sha amaraavatimyathaasya salokataamsya sabhaasya sabhaayaamsya samsadipratyudyayau...shm bala ivaasuravishnu...taarakaamayeaad anavara, i.e. bhagadattasyeva tripishtapeyathaaslew namucisya nitimenaapi samapratimatejasaobtained a hymn to surya from brahmaan and communicated it to naarada, c. has by error sdiscourse with surabhipage3 a brahma shankara shaadyair devavrindaiivasya samaprabhaavasureshvaramaashanisamair mushtibhiaabhi shekesya purim taam amaraavatimsya dayitaam purimaasaneaasanamtulyam, sc. arjunaaasanamvritrani sudana, shacipatishacipatibala vritrahaam ivaapsaraa, sc. upatishthatiivasya bhavanamvajraabhihata, sc. vritradevaa shpuro gamaasama dyute, sc. maandhaatrisamampradeshinim shdattaam, given to maandhaatri to sucksyaardhaasanamspardhamaanasya shena, sc. yayaateaad anavara, sc. arjunasadanaprakhyam, sc. the hermitage of nara and naaraayanadhvajam ivocchritamvattulyabalopamamvritrahaasadmaniripupramaathi, i.e. arjunasya bhavanam...amaraavatimsya bhavanenahusha fell from the seat of sh.a king is like to sh.aadin...devaganaan, seen by maarkandeya in the stomach of naaraayanash caaham suraadhipa, says naaraayanabaka sh samaagamamtrayas trimshad yathaa devaa sarve sh purogamaaairaavatam samaasthaayadaiteyaa iva shena, sc. dahya maanaaivayathaasya... sadanaatvishnu gave the earth to sh.prabhritaya...surasattamaaaad ana varam, sc. dasharathapratimatejasaa, sc. sugrivaprahlaadayor iva, sc. yuddhamdeva gandharvaa shpurogamaadevai shpuro gamaidevaa...shpurogamaapratimagauravaan, sc. the brothers of yudhishthirasya vajramtridashaanaam yathaa shvipulau baahu sc. durgaas shdhvajasamucchrayauheld gaandiva eighty five yearsgave a diadem to arjunasya sc. saarathi maataliarjuna had learnt the use of weapons from sh.came to see the fightarjuna had learnt the use of weapons from sh. vaishravanopama, sc. yudhishthiraivasya mahishi, i.e. shacisya mahishim, i.e. shacisuraganeshvarasamo dhananjaya, i.e. arjunadevadevaa sa shaavivishu...suraa shsayathaadevaa saha shenahad given weapons to arjunapratimatejasa, i.e. bhimasenabhaumana saha shenasama, sc. bhimasenaivasya dayita suhrit, sc. maatalisyaayam i.e. maatali sakhaa caiva mantri saarathir eva casya sakhaa, i.e. maatalipage3 b devaraajamwill side with the paandavasyatra i.e. in the east sho bhyashicyataatra i.e. in the south vrittena vritro pi shshatrutvam iyivaanatra i.e. in the west devim ditim suptaam aatmaprasavadhaarinim vigarbhaam akaroc cho yatra jaato marud ganabalanisudanasamaan, sc. the paandavasivasaptamaac caapi divasaad amaavaasyaa bhavishyati sangraamo yujyataam tasyaam, taam aahu shdaivataamivasamadyute, i.e. yudhishthiraulkaa...shaashanisamaprabhaaperformed sacrifices on meruonly c b. has satramivasya...salokataamaadibhi suraiivaa ivaamareshaaashanisamasvanambalam sha ivaahavecaapasamaprabham, sc. the bow of shvetacaapopamam, sc. the bow of shankhaaashanisamasparshampratimaanakalpam indraat majam, i.e. arjunaivasama, sc. abhimanyudevaa shpurogamaayathaa shas trivishtapeyathaa sh...puraa vivyaadha daanavam vipracittimmahaashanir yathaa bhrashtaa shmuktaaivayathaa devaasure yuddhe sh shambarayo puraa, sc. samaagamamayam shakra ivaahaveaashanisamadyutimsamaayathovaaca puraa shm mahaabuddhir brihaspatiaashanisamasparshaancaapopamam, sc. the bow of bhishmamaya shau yathaa puraayathaa sho vajrapaanir daarayan parvataan uttamaanyathaaivamukhaa suraaivayathaa devaasure yuddhe bala cauaashaniravo pamayathaa shrathaaashanihataa drumavanta ivaacalaasyaatithitaam gataa, c. has by error shaktaivav. draupadeya, pl.opamaaairaavatagatamv. draupadeya, pl.ivasadmagata, sc. abhimanyusamam, sc. abhimanyuopama, sc. hari, the son of akampanapratimavikramaafather of arjunasuryagunodayam, sc. shivaaadimsh ca surotta maanjambhau yathaa puraadevaganai sahadhvajasamaprabham, sc. the standard of ashvatthaa manprahlaadam samare jitvaa yathaa shakram marud ganaashambarayor iva, sc. yuddhamtulyaparaakramai, sc. shakaipratima... saatyakibhallena shaashanisannibhenatrailo kyakaankshinor aasic ch prahlaadayor iva, sc. yuddhamtulyabala, sc. saatyakiyathaa vritravadhe devaa puraa shm maharshaya, sc. parivavruiva vairocani yathaa, sc. yuyudhaatecaapam ivaaparampuraa devaasure yuddhe shsya balinaa yathaaaashanisphotasamam, sc. ninaadambalam... rudra shaantakopamamtvatprasaadaat, hrishikesha, sh suraganeshvara trailokyavijayam shrimaan praaptavaansureshatvam gata sho hatvaa daityaan sahasrasha prahlaadayor iva, sc. yuddhamopamaaamoghaam...shaktim shvinirmitaam, i.e. the dart of karnaamoghaa datteyam shakti shena, = tulya balaivam daityaa yathaa puraa, sc. ayodha yantayathaa devaasure yuddhe shsya saha daanavaiam daityacamum iva, sc. aayaantam prahraa dayor iva, sc. yuddhamiva prahraadayor iva, sc. yuddhamyaam vai praadaat suryaputraaya i.e. karna sh kundalaabhyaam nimaaya, sc. shaktim, i.e. amoghaashaktyaa, = yathaa sho vritravadhe marudbhi, sc. pujyamaanadattayaa, sc. shaktyaa, i.e. amoghaamuktaa ivaashanipage3 a dattaa, sc. shakti, i.e. amoghaadattayaa, sc. shaktyaa, = paarthe vaa shkalpe, i.e. arjunayathaa kruddho rane sho daanavaanaam kshayam puraagajah shgajopamaivayathaacaapam ivaaparamsya vajrenaaadimsh ca surotta maansamaanavirya shalyashaktyaa, i.e. amoghaayathaa devaasure yuddhe jambha shaua ivaasuraan, sc. chittvaayathaiva caasito megha shcaapena i.e. by the rainbow shobhitajishnu shtulyaparaakramavishnusamam, sc. viryamshaktivinaakritam, sc. karnavijaya, the bow of karna, had been given by sh. to raama jaamad agnyadevataanaam...sa shaanaammarud vritadevaa shpurogamaasya saarathye ...maatalivatdhanushi shreshthe shcaapanibhetulyaparaakrama, sc. drauniniruddhaa... jihirshavo mritam daityaah shaagnibhyaam ivaasakriteneva yathaa daityaan hanyamaanaanyathaasyaatithitaam gatvaa, sc. the samshaptakashate mahaasure jambhe sh vishnu yathaa guru, sc. abhyanandattulyabala, sc. karnashauryena shsyatulyaparaakramaatulyaparaakramauivaprayaccha medinim raajne shaayaiva harir yathaaeneva yathaashanimivacaapapratimena dhanvanaaivashambara shyor yathaa, sc. yuddhamviddhveva shm namucishambarayor iva, sc. yuddhamo namucer ivaarelokapaalaa sa shaadhanush ca tac chsharaa sanopamamaashaniprakhyaruci, sc. saayakatulyabalaayathaa shdhvajaiaashanir ivot srishtayathaa purvam shsyaasurasamkshayeenevaasure bale, sc. hatejambho yathaa shsamaagamaad vai naagendram airaavanam indravaahyam, sc. pratyudyayaubalim sha ivaahave, sc. yodhayano vritram ivaahvayanviryopamaayathaa...suraraatsuraadhipavritra shau yathaahaveyuddhaaya sho vritram ivaahvayanvirocanas tu shena maayayaa nirjitavispardhinayathaa sh saadayitvaa mahaasuraanshiva is identified with sh.sya balinaa yathaa, sc. yuddhamtridivam...shsyao devapatir yathaao yathaa daityabalaani, sc. nihatyaopamadevaraajam purandaramdevaa...shshreshthaahmarudganair vritabhishma had obtained weapons from sh.ivadevaan...shpurogamaanbrihaspatesh ca samvaadam shsya casyaiti salokataamsakhaa shsya...maandhaataasyaiti salokataamdevaa shpuro gamaashriyaa shsya samvaadampramukhaish ca daivataibalekathaampage3 b devaa sarve shpurogamaadevaa shpuro gamaapurogaash ca lokapaalaadeveshvaravishnu will bestow the sovereignty on sh.tulyaparaakramaapratispardhi, sc. raavanasalokataamattacked by mandaraaed shivashiva assumed the form of sh.shiva then assumed his own formtulyaparaakrama, sc. maandhaatriaadyaa devataashiva is identified with sh.osi marutaam, sc. shivasa prajaapati shaantam jagatlearnt the names of shivacaarushirsha ...shsya dayita sakhaashaapaac chsyagritsamada...shsya dayita sakhaatvamparaakrame shsamam, sc. bhishmadivodaasa built vaaraanasi at the injunction of sh.syevaamaraavatimgritsamada was meant to be sh.shambarasamvaadammaayaam shsyavarshativasati...shena sahaena saha modateyajnayathaatribhuvaneshvarabalanisudanamdevaa shpuro gamaapraacyaam shaaya, sc. balikarma prayojayetvarshatitulyaprabhaavaanaamonly c read shukra with b. vasubhikrishna identified with sh.paralysed by krishnaaadishu deveshushacipati harimaangata sarvalokaamaratvamgrihopamamkrishna identified with sh.sadmapratikaashasadrisham rupam shcaapasyasamakarmaanam, sc. arjunatejasa, sc. yudhi shthirayajnesada...shm shacipatimtejasi, sc. arjuna devaa shpurogamaasurapatisya bhavaneena saha modatethe slayer of shambarayathaayathaa shaa puraa balim, sc. avidhyat c. has sthe slayer of shambara and paakasahasranayanash caapi vajriperformer of a hundred sacrificessahasraaksha ...varshenaapaalayat prajaasaakshaad api shgurur maanya sho, i.e. brihaspatisahasraaksham deveshamdevaraajamo, sc. sabhaar ivaaparaasuraan paraajitya jagat paati shapiamarashreshthadevaraajaivaivayathaaarjuna obtained celestial weapons from sh.devaraajaaasanena sh, sc. triptadevaa shpurogamaaivakarma...shor vaa daityasenaasu sankhyesaakshaad api shdevam vaapi shmshaasanaad vaa shoivaparaakramam, sc. bhishmacame to see the battleapi saakshaat shivam ivaacintyam puraa vritrena nirjitamsaakshaad api shau caapi devasattameapiivaivayena i.e. with the bow, of karna daityaganaan, raajan, jitavaan vai shapi...saakshaat shoivam vritranijaghnusham yathaayathaa puraa vritravadhe shor yathaa purvam mahatyaa daityasenayaa, sc. vimardadevaraajayathaaorigin of the namesaakshaad api shumaayayaa ca shokratum aahritya shatakritvaivaivaosh ca samvaadam namucesh cadevaraajesarvai kratushatair ishtam, na tvam eka sc. shakra shyathaasalokataam...shodevaraajash ca bhagavaan vishnush caaditi nandanauor acintyasya sattre varshasahasrikepuri shor apiivavritrahanamvritrahanam devaraajayathaa...shor vajradharasya yajnesaakshaad api shivasaakshaad api shoyaathaa nihatyaariganaan shr divam, sc. yayauivavritreneva sho, sc. yuddhamdevaraajavikramahaving thousand eyesthe king of the godsvajrena coditenathe lord of the godsyathaajahi...vritram yathaa r mahendraajayad r balim vairocanim puraavritram r yathaa, sc. jaghaanaslew vritrashakro r yathaayathaathe king of the godsaad iva nandaneivamuncan aad ashanim ivavajrapaaniapivritram hatvaasahasraakshaena dattaam divyaam shaktimshatakratusama dyutifather of arjunapratimamsamadyutisamadyutisamadyutesadrishasamo yudhisamaprabhamparaakramaashatakratumrathamshata kratumsamadyutisya bhavanamsamadyutimaatalir ayam sya saarathiat jaatismarahrada . went to heaven after having performed sacrificesread yam instead of yamsutaam ivapage3 b purandarapurandarasahasraakshamastram...dayitam syavajram... sya dayitam bhimam astramsya bhavanamapibaka daalbhyau... sakhaayau syashatakratushaktir sya, i.e. amoghaavimaa nam syavimaanan syasya dayitaam, sc. shacishatakratuyathaasahaputra shacipatisya puri varyaa maraavatishakramivaivaniveshaneopamayathaa...camupratimamdevasha trun iva  kiritamaaliivasya... sakhaa, sc. bhagadattayathaa daityacamum... o mamarda hashatakratushakram...purandaramsamadyutimsamadyutisamadyutimsya maayayaagrihopamamapisamipatashata kratauaalayama ivaapara, . devaraajan, . devesha, q.v. devendra, . goshabdaatmaja, q.v. hari, . harishmashru, . harihaya, . harimat, . harivaahana, . ishvara, q.v. jagadishvara, q.v. kaashyapa, q.v. kaushika, q.v. kiritin, q.v. kushikottama, q.v. lokatrayesha, . lokeshvareshvara, . maghavat, . purandara, . puruhuta, . pushaanuja, . pushkarekshana, . sahasradrish, . sahasraaksha, . vibudhashreshtha, . vibudhaadhipa, . vibudhaadhipati, . vibudheshvara, . vishvabhuj, . vrishaakapi, . vritrashatru, . vritrahan, . vritrahantri, . vritranisudana, .
indra, pl. . b, . b, . b, .
indraabha, son of the elder dhritaraashtra .
indradamana, a prince, a descendant of atri . aatreya.
. after some time yudhishthira taught arjuna in private the science that would reveal the whole universe to him, and told him to practise severe austerities bhishma, etc know the fourfold dhanur veda, the braahma weapon, etc. all celestial weapons are in the possession of indra, imparted to him by the celestials from fear of vritra. then arjuna took up the gaandiva, etc blessed by brahmans, siddhas, and invisible spirits, and by krishnaa, who wished him success from dhaatri, vidhaatri, hri, shri, kirti, dhriti, pushti, umaa, lakshmi, sarasvati, the vasus, rudras, aadityas, the hosts of the maruts, the vishvedevas, and the saadhyas, and wished him safety from the spirits of the sky, earth, and heaven, and all other enemies and having walked round his brothers and dhaumya, he set out towards the north. all creatures left the path of arjuna, who was urged by the desire of beholding indra . he passed over many mountains, and reached himavat in one day by means of his yoga then he passed over gandhamaadana, etc and reached indrakila, walking night and day untiringly. here he was addressed by a voice in the skies, and beheld indra in the guise of a brahman, who told him to throw away his bow as of no use there, as this was the abode only of peaceful brahmans, and advised him to wish for heavenly bliss but arjuna only asked for the celestial weapons, which indra said he should obtain when he had seen shiva . then indra disappeared, and arjuna remained, devoted to yoga .
indradyumna1, a raajarshi . b, .
indradyumna2, a brahman .
indradyumna3, a lake . next.
indradyumnasaras, a lake . the prec.
. the paandavas asked maarkandeya is there anybody that is older than thou he related the raajarshi indradyumna, who had fallen from heaven, complained that his fame must have passed away, and asked me if recognized him as did not, he became a horse and carried me to the himavat to the owl praavaarakarna, who was older than the owl we took to the lake indradyumna to the crane naadijangha, who was older than the owl the crane indicated us the tortoise akupaara in the same lake. akupaara knew indradyumna, and said that indradyumna had planted the yupa, times, and that this lake had been excavated by the feet of the cows given away by him to the brahmans. then a chariot came from heaven, and a celestial voice called indradyumna back to heaven . he first brought me and the owl to our respective places, and then went away in that chariot. the paandavas praised maarkandeya for having caused indradyumna to regain his sphere he said that krishna also had raised the raajarshi nriga from hell and caused him to regain heaven .
indrajaala, a celestial weapon . aindra.
. indrajit tied raama and lakshmana in a network of those arrows of his which he had obtained as boons. sugriva and the monkeys sushena, etc surrounded them. vibhi shana came and roused them with the prajnaastra sugriva extracted the arrows and applied the medicine vishalyaa from the mountain shveta a guhyaka of kuberas brought water, by rubbing ones eyes with which all invisible creatures became visible. raama, lakshmana, sugriva, etc rubbed their eyes. having informed raavana, indrajit returned without having completed his daily sacrifice receiving a hint from vibhishana, lakshmana killed indrajit. raavana would kill sitaa, but was dissuaded by avindhya .
. raavana sent indrajit to fight raama, lakshmana, and sugriva. he first fought with lakshmana, then with angada, then he became invisible, but continued to fight .
indrajit, a raakshasa, son of raavana . raavanaatmaja, raavani.
indrakila, a mountain .
indraloka . b, . shakraloka.
. after the lokapaalas had gone away, arjuna began to think of the chariot of indra, which, guided by maatali, came n full of swords, missiles, maces, thunderbolts, etc and great naagas with fiery mouths, and drawn by, horses of golden hue, and with the flagstaff vaijayanta . maatali, descending, invited him to ascend the chariot, as indra waited to behold him, surrounded by gods, rishis, gandharvas, and apsarases. as that chariot cannot be obtained even by hundreds of raajasuyas and horse sacrifices, and as even gods and daanavas are not competent to ride in it, and as he that has no ascetic merit is not competent even to see or touch it, arjuna first let maatali ascend it and control the horses. then he purified himself in the gangaa, repeated his prayers, gratified the pitris, and bade farewell to the mandara mountain . then he ascended, in the chariot, through the sky and beheld thousands of vimaanas of extra ordinary beauty there was no sun or moon or fire, but they blazed in light of their own, generated by virtue and ascetic merit and the stars, which from earth look small in con sequence of their distance, but are very large, were seen by him in their places and raajarshis who had attained siddhi, and heroes fallen in battle, and those that had obtained heaven by tapas and gandharvas, and guhyakas, and rishis, and apsarases. maatali explained to him that the stars were virtuous persons stationed in their respective places . at the gates he beheld airaavata with four tusks equal to kailaasa. continuing along the path of the siddhas, he passed through the regions of kings, and thus passing through svargaloka he beheld amaraavati, the city of indra . when arjuna had entered the city, praised by apsarases, gandharvas, siddhas, great rishis, and gods, he, at the request of indra, went to the large starry way named suravithi, where he met with the saadhyas, vishvas, maruts, ashvins, aadityas, vasus, rudras, brahmarshis, raajarshis with dilipa at their head, tumburu, naarada, haahaa, and huhu. then he beheld indra, eulogized by gandharvas headed by vishvaavasu, etc and was seated on indras own seat and gandharvas, headed by tumburu, sang to them, and thousands of apsarases danced there . the gods and gandharvas offered him arghya, etc and caused him to enter the palace of indra. there he received indras weapons, the thunder bolt and lightning . at the request of indra he dwelt there for five years, and learned the dance and music of the gandharvas from citrasena, whom indra gave him as a friend, but he was longing for his brothers and kunti and thirsting for revenge . in the beginning, seeing that the eyes of arjuna were fixed upon urvashi, indra despatched citrasena to urvashi, who gladly consented to choose arjuna for her lover . urvashi related to arjuna that as he had looked on her only in a solemn assembly of celestials held on account of his coming, where the rudras, aadityas, ashvins, vasus, maharshis, raajarshis, siddhas, caaranas, yakshas, and mahoragas were present, and the gandharvas played the vinaas, and the apsarases danced, indra had caused citrasena to send her to him, and that she was herself in love with him. arjuna declared that he regarded her as the wife of his guru, and that he had been gazing at her because she was the mother of the paurava race. she replied that the sons and grandsons of purus race, that had come thither in consequence of ascetic merit, did all sport with the apsarases without incurring any sin. but arjuna swore that he regarded her as his mother. she then cursed him, saying that he should have to pass his time among females as a dancer and destitute of manhood, and then went away. indra told him that this would come to pass in the thirteenth year of their exile, when they would live unknown to all, but having passed one year thus he would regain his manhood. the desire of the man that listens to this history of arjuna never runs after lustful ends, etc. . one day the brahmarshi lomasha in the course of his wanderings went to the abode of indra. as lomasha within himself wondered how arjuna, being a kshatriya, had attained the seat of shakra, who was worshipped by the gods themselves, shakra, knowing his thoughts, explained to him who arjuna really was that moreover the asuras, the sons of danu, named the nivaatakavacas, who dwell in paataala, proud of a boon they had acquired, were planning the destruction of the gods, and could not be slain by others than either krishna or arjuna but madhusudana should not be urged when the task was insignificant, lest his energy should consume the whole universe therefore arjuna should slay them. at the request of indra, seconded by arjuna, lomasha went to the kaamyaka wood to yudhishthira in order to bring him news about arjuna and recommend him to visit the tirthas, and follow him and protect him from the raakshasas . as dhritaraashtra learnt from dvaipaa yana of arjunas arrival and stay at indras abode, he expressed his anxiety to sanjaya . conversation of sanjaya and dhritaraashtra about arjunas encounter with shiva in the guise of a kiraata, etc. . during the five years of arjunas absence the paandavas fed themselves and, snaataka brahmans, some with and some without fire, by killing deer, yudhishthira going towards the east, bhima towards the south, and the twins towards the west and north . having heard of the way of life of the paandavas, dhritaraashtra expressed his anxiety before sanjaya, fearing bhima with his iron mace, etc. sanjaya commemorated how krishna, dhrishtadyumna, viraata, dhrishta ketu, and the kaikeyas had visited the paandavas in the kaamyaka wood, whose conversations sanjaya had learnt through spies and formerly told dhritaraashtra, sanjaya further related that krishna had consented to become the charioteer of arjuna and to assist the paandavas in the battle, together with raama, akrura, gada, shaamba, pradyumna, aahuka, dhrishtadyumna, and the son of shishupaala, and yuyu dhaana, and the kaikeya and paancaala princes and the matsya king, and krishna had declared that yudhishthira should, along with his brothers living at haastinapura, rule the earth .
indramaarga, a tirtha . c, . g, .
. b bhishma said once a brahman obtained a son named matanga, who, though procreated by a person of a different order, had, however, the rites of infancy and youth performed according to the ordinances laid n for brahmans. his father, desiring to perform a sacrifice, ordered him to collect the articles, and he set out riding in a car drawn by a young ass, that bore away the car to its mother matanga repeatedly struck the animal with his goad on its nose but the old she ass consoled it, saying, a caandaala it is that is driving thee there is no severity in a brahman. asked by matanga, the she ass revealed to him that his father was a shudra following the profession of a barber, who begat him upon a brahman woman excited with desire thou art, therefore, a caandaala by birth. matanga returned home, told his father what he had heard, retired to the forest, and began to undergo the austerest penances in order to acquire the status of a brahman, so that he scorched the very deities. indra came and offered him boons, but the status of a brahman, he said, could not be won by penances . matanga then stood for years on one foot. indra came once more and said from the order of brute life one attains to the state of humanity if born as a human being, one is sure to take birth as a pukkasha or a caandaala after, years one attains to the status of a shudra then after, years that of a vaishya after a period that is sixty times longer, that of a kshatriya after a period that is sixty times longer than this, to that of a fallen brahman after a period times as long, to that of a brahman living by the profession of arms after a period times as long, to that of a brahman reciting the gaayatri and sacred mantras after a period times as long, to that of a brahman conversant with the entire vedas and the scriptures . matanga then practised austerer penances, standing on one foot for, years in yoga meditation. indra once more came and said the same. matanga then repaired to gayaa, and there passed years on one foot in yoga, and was reduced to only skin and bones, and dropped n on the ground from sheer exhaustion. indra came quickly now matanga accepted the boons that he should be celebrated as chaneva, and obtain the worship of all women, and his fame should become unrivalled in the three worlds .
indraparvata, a mountain .
indraprastha, the capital of the paandavas . also the following synonyms shakraprastha, . shakrapuri, . shatakratuprastha, . khaandavaprastha, .
indrasena1, a son of the elder parikshit .
indrasena2, the charioteer of yudhishthira .
indrasena2, the son of nala and damayanti .
indrasena4, a kuru warrior .
indrasenaa, the daughter of nala and damayanti .
indrasenaa, the daughter of naaraayana and the wife of mudgala . c the daughter of naaraayana, who was renowned for her beauty, followed her husband, who was, years old, .
indrataapana, an asura .
indratirtha, a tirtha. y, . bb there indra had performed horse sacrifices, and given away enormous wealth to brihaspati, etc. on account of this indra came to be called shatakratu, and the tirtha to be called indratirtha, .
indratoyaa, a tirtha. e by bathing in near gandhamaadana, and in karatoyaa in kuranga, after three days fasting, one acquires the merit of a horse sacrifice, .
indravarman, a maalava king .
. questioned by yudhishthira about the misery endured by indra and shaci, shalya related once the prajaapati tvashtri, from antipathy to indra, created a son who had three heads, called vishvarupa. beholding his austerities, indra became alarmed, and in vain caused apsarases to tempt him then he slew him with his thunderbolt, but was yet afraid of his appearance, and prevailed upon a carpenter to cut off the heads out flew birds partridges, sparrows and hawks, quails. then tvashtri created vritra, who swallowed up indra. the gods created jrimbhikaa vritra yawned, and indra emerged. tvashtri strengthened vritra indra returned the gods consulted with the munis, and sitting on mount mandara, they thought of vishnu . indra, with . and ri repaired to vishnu, who taught them, with ri. and g to make eternal friendship between indra and vritra . indra then slew him in the evening with froth blended with the thunderbolt, in which vishnu had entered. g y raa m. u and ri. glorified indra. but indra was overpowered by falsehood and brahmanicide, and became bereft of his consciousness, and lay concealed in water the earth became treeless, the rivers were interrupted, the rains ceased . then ri. and . crowned nahusha as king of giving him their tapas whatever being may stand within thy sight daa y raa p g bh. thou shalt absorb his power. nahusha then assumed a sensual turn of mind, amusing himself with aps. and devakanyaa and vishvaavasu, naarada, g and the six seasons, in nandana, and on kailaasa, himavat, mandara, shveta, sahya, mahendra, malaya, etc. he ordained that shaci should wait upon him. shaci repaired to brihaspati, who promised soon to unite her with indra . nahusha became enraged the earth, with as g k m. u trembled nahusha reminded of indras behaviour towards ahalyaa, etc. at last the gods promised to bring him shaci but brihaspati, as a brahman, would not aban her, quoting a saying of brahmaan he told her to ask for time from nahusha, and so did the gods, led by agni . shaci obtained the boon from nahusha, and returned to brihaspati. with agni, repaired to vishnu, who said let indra offer sacrifice to me having performed the horse sacrifice, he will regain his dignity. . and ri. and brihaspati proceeded to the spot where indra was, performed a horse sacrifice, and divided the brahmahatyaa among trees and rivers and mountains and earth and women and indra was free from fever, but vanished again from fear of nahusha. shaci worshipped nishaa, who caused upashruti to appear, and shaci prayed to upashruti . upashruti, followed by shaci, crossed the heavenly groves and many mountains and came to the northern side of himavat, and thence to the sea in an island there was a large lake with an assemblage of lotuses there they found indra in the fibres of a lotus stalk, and, praising him, shaci implored his help against nahusha . indra said that nahusha had been strengthened by the ri. with the merits of offerings to . and p. shaci should tell nahusha to visit her on a vehicle borne by ri. nahusha consented. shaci prevailed upon brihaspati to find out indra, which he did by means of a sacrifice, prevailing upon agni to search for him. agni came back within the twinkling of an eye, having searched everywhere except in the waters, which he dared not enter . brihaspati praised agni and strengthened him with hymns of the veda agni then found out indra, and soon returned and informed brihaspati. this came with . ri. and g and praised indra by referring to his former deeds . indra increased little by little, and having assumed his original form he grew strong, and asked what business yet remained, as he had killed vishvarupa and vritra. brihaspati told him of nahusha, who had been strengthened by the power of the . ri etc and how nahusha, carried by m. ri journeyed from world to world. lp. kubera and yama vaivasvata and soma and varuna came and rejoiced that vishvarupa and vritra had been killed, and they and agni promised him their assistance against nahusha on the condition that they and agni should have their shares in sacrifices, and that kubera, yama, and varuna should this day be crowned along with indra . while indra, with lp. and was considering the means of slaying nahusha, the m. ri. agastya came and rejoiced that vishvarupa and vritra had been killed, and related how nahusha had been hurled from heaven . the . ri. and b. ri weary with carrying him, had questioned him if certain mantras pronounced by brahmaan were authentic, to which nahusha, bewildered by the dark principle, had answered in the negative ri. reproached him, as m. ri. had formerly declared them to be authentic. nahusha touched agastyas head with his foot, and instantly lost his power and luck, and was agitated with fear. then agastya cursed him fall thou from heaven, the effect of all thy good deeds has been exhausted for, years thou shalt be a snake upon earth then thou mayst come back to svarga. m. ri p y sp raa g devakanyaa, and the bands of aps and tanks, rivers, mountains, and the sea came and rejoiced . indra, glorified by g. and aps mounted airaavata. agni, the m. ri brihaspati, yama, varuna, and kubera accompanied him. indra went to the three worlds with g and aps and was praised by angiras with hymns of the atharvaveda. then he granted atharvaangiras the boon that his name would be connected with this veda and that he would get a share in sacrifices. united with shaci he protected the world virtuously .
indrota, a brahman, descendant of shunaka . b, .
. b bhishma said there was, in days of yore, a king paarikshit janamejaya from want of judgment he became guilty of killing a brahman then all the brahmans, with his priests, abaned him burning day and night with regret, the king retired into the woods deserted by his subjects also, and consumed by repentance, he underwent the most rigid austerities. in order to purify himself of the sin of brahmanicide he interrogated many brahmans, and wandered from country to country over the whole earth. one day he met indrota shaunaka, who rebuked him for his brahmanicide and reminded him of the messengers of yama in the abode of yama . janamejaya meekly listened to the reproof, saying that he was much afraid of yama he knew that, according to the vedas, wretches like himself had forfeited all claim to the respect of the world, and had after death to dwell in hell like pulindas and shabaras, and he sought instruction from indrota, who told him to repent and, knowing the vedas, etc act in such a way that the brahmans might not be angry with him shaunaka said that his kinsmen and friends would call him sinful because he instructed janamejaya. janamejaya swore never again to injure the brahmans . indrota discoursed to the repentant king on the means of cleansing himself, quoting a verse sung by yayaati about the sacredness of kurukshetra, etc and recommending him to go to mahaasaras, etc quoting also a saying of manu and a verse of satyavat. mahaasaras, etc are so sacred that one guilty of fลticide becomes cleansed at even yojanas from them. manu has said that by diving in water after thrice reciting the agha marshana, one reaps the fruits of the final bath in a horse sacrifice. the gods and asuras in days of yore were instructed by m. ri. brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods, how one should cleanse himself from sin. indrota then assisted janamejaya, cleansed of his sins, in the horse sacrifice .
iraa, an apsaras .
iraa, a goddess . ilaa.
iraamaa, a river .
iraavat, a son of arjuna paandava . b . was begotten by arjuna on the daughter of the king of the naagas when her husband had been slain by garuda, childless as she was, she was bestowed upon arjuna by airaavata. . grew up in the naagaloka, protected by his mother, and when his wicked uncle had abaned him from hatred of arjuna, . went to indraloka, having heard that arjuna had gone thither. there he gladdened arjuna who, dismissing him, told him to render him assistance in the battle, . arjunasuta, arjunaatmaja, aarjuni.
iraavati, a river, the present raavi . b, . airaavati
irin, pl a family .
ishtaakrita, a sacrifice, .
ishtikrita, a sacrifice, .
ishupa, v. ishupad.
ishupad, an asura .
itihaasa1, etc etc etc. jaya1.
jaabaali, a rishi, son of vishvaamitra . b, .
jagati . c, . bhumi.
jaguda, pl a people .
jaahnaviya, adj. .
jahnu1, an ancient king . b, . b, .
jaigishavya, a muni . ff, .
jaimini, a rishi, disciple of vyaasa . b .
jaitra, a son of dhritaraashtra .
jaitra, said of various chariots, .
jaajali, a brahman. b, .
jajnasena, v. yajnasena.
jalaa, a river .
jaala, a celestial weapon .
jalada, a mountain in shaakadvipa. b, = malaya
jaladhaara, a mountain in shaakadvipa. b, .
jalandhama, a warrior of skanda. u, .
jalapradaanika, adj. .
. janamejaya inquired of vaishampaayana as to what dhritaraashtra, etc did after the death of duryodhana. dhritaraashtras grief sanjaya comforted him, and suggested the performance of the obsequious rites of the fallen heroes. dhritaraashtra lamented sanjaya rebuked and consoled him . vidura addressed dhritaraashtra and comforted him charmed by viduras discourse, dhrtaraashtra asked him to continue his observations on the vanity of human life vidura continued his discourse, and described human life as it runs from the very beginning, comparing it to a wilderness abounding with dangers, explaining the comparison according to the religion of moksha asked by dhrita raashtra, vidura continued his discourse on human life . dhritaraashtra swooned away, but was comforted by vyaasa, etc wept and lamented vyaasa comforted him by explaining the secret history of the slaughter, etc. . dhritaraashtra promised to live vyaasa disappeared . requested by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related after duryodhana had been slain, and all the troops slaughtered, sanjaya, deprived of his spiritual sight, came back to dhritaraashtra, and recommended him to cause the obsequial rites to be performed. dhritaraashtra swooned away vidura comforted him . dhritaraashtra resolved to visit the field of battle with the kuru ladies in his company. the kuru ladies were placed in chariots under viduras supervision the royal household, with a large number of the citizens, started from haastinapura . having proceeded a krosha, dhritaraashtra met with ashvatthaa man, etc. . kripa related to gaandhaari the fall of duryo dhana in unfair fight, and their nightly attack on the camp of the paandavas then ashvatthaaman, etc took leave of dhritaraashtra in order to conceal themselves from the wrath of the paandavas, and urged their steeds to wards the banks of the gangaa, where they separated from one another kripa went to haastinapura kritavarman to his own king ashvatthaa man set out for the abode of vyaasa before the sun rose it was after this that the sons of paandu encountered ashvatthaaman and vanquished him . yudhishthira and his brothers set out in order to meet dhritaraashtra, accompanied by krishna, etc. they met the weeping ladies of the royal house on the way, and saluted dhritaraashtra, who reluctantly embraced yudhishthira, and broke an iron statue of bhima, mistaking it for bhima himself he then grieved for having slain bhima, fell n, and was raised by his charioteer sanjaya krishna enlightened him, and told him not to cherish wrath . certain maid servants came and washed dhritaraashtra then krishna again addressed him, assuring him that the paandavas were perfectly innocent then dhritaraashtra embraced bhima, etc. . commanded by dhritaraashtra, the paandava brothers with krishna then proceeded to see gaan dhaari, who wished to curse yudhishthira. the great ri. vyaasa, capable of proceeding everywhere with the fleetness of the wind, and capable of seeing the heart of every creature with his spiritual vision, understood her evil intentions, and having cleansed himself by the water of the gangaa, he suddenly appeared, and told her not to be angry with the paandavas, but remember that she had every day for the eighteen days that battle lasted, when duryodhana asked her to bless him, said thither goes victory where righteousness is. gaandhaari admitted that she and dhritaraashtra should protect the paandavas with as much care as kunti herself protected them, the fault being with duryodhana, etc. but bhimas unfair combat with duryodhana in the presence of krishna moved her wrath . bhima addressed gaandhaari, and extenuated his fault in having slain duryodhana unfairly . gaandhaari then blamed bhima for drinking dushaasanas blood, when vrishasena had deprived nakula of his steeds bhima denied that he had really drunk dushaasanas blood karna knew this well seeing nakula deprived by vrishasena of his steeds, caused the rejoicing brothers to be filled with dread when the tresses of draupadi were seized, uttered certain words in rage dared not leave that vow unaccomplished lest should be regarded as having swerved from the duties of a kshatriya. gaandhaari then inquired after yudhishthira, who appeared before her and invoked her curses on himself for his sinful slaughter of all her sons gaandhaaris glance blasted a nail of yudhishthiras toe. arjuna moved away to the seat of krishna, and also the other paandavas became restless. gaandhaari then comforted the paandavas and dismissed them. they then met with their mother kunti, who wept seeing their many sears. draupadi wept for her children and abhimanyu kunti consoled her, and so did gaandhaari .
jalasandha1, a magadha king . maagadha.
jalasandha2, a son of dhritaraashtra .
jalelaa, a maatri. u, .
jaleyu, a son of raudraashva .
jamadagni, a rishi, the son of ricika and satyavati and the father of raama1 . at this time, while gaadhi, the king of kaanyakubja, was dwelling in the wood, there was born to him a beautiful daughter, satyavati, whom ricika bhaargava asked in marriage. gaadhi said that, according to a family custom, the bridegroom must give a ry of, brown steeds with a single sable ear each . ricika obtained them from varuna and married satyavati in kaanyakubja on the gangaa, the very gods being companions of the bridegroom . then his father bhrigu came to see him and his wife, and being pleased with satyavati, granted her the boon that a son should be born to herself and to her mother, telling her that during their season they should embrace, her mother an ashvattha tree and herself an udumbara tree, and eat two pots of rice and milk which he had prepared, having ransacked the whole universe. then bhrigu disappeared. they, however, made an interchange both of the pots and of the trees which they embraced. knowing this by his divine knowledge, bhrigu came once more and told satyavati that she had been deluded by her mother, and that therefore she would give birth to a brahman of kshatriya character and her mother to a kshatriya of brahman character . at her repeated entreaties, however, he granted her that not her son but her grandson should be of that description. the son of satyavati was j who excelled many rishis in vedic lore, and to whom the whole dhanurveda appeared spontaneously, and likewise the four kinds of weapon, . j. devoted himself to the study of the veda and to penances. he married renukaa, the daughter of king prasenajit, and lived with her in his hermitage practising austerities. she gave birth to five sons, of whom raama was the youngest. once when renukaa had been filled with desire, seeing the maarttikaavata king citraratha bathing, together with his wife, j. ordered his sons rumanvat the eldestanupapatidronavadhap.parashu raamabhaarga vaanaam kule jaata, father of parashu raamaraamop.page3 b bhaargavam, son of ricika and satyavatifather of raamadhenvaa...vatsamslain by the sons of arjuna kaartavirya mokshadh.ricikasya putra, one of the rishis of the northhad praised vishnuvishvaamitrop.his birth raamahradagatim labhet, sc. by bathing in mahaahradacyavana kushikasamv.bhrigushaardula, ricika will beget j who will master the dhanurvedabisastainyop.etymology of his nameshapatha vidhichattropaana hotpattiesh ca samvaadam suryasya caterrifies the sun, who in order to pacify him gives him an umbrella and a pair of sandalsaanushaasanik.among the rishis who have attained to heaven through observance of fastsricikatanaya, one of the gurus of dhaneshvara in the northricikaputra, one of the rishis of the northarjuna kaartaviryafather of raamanakulaakhyaanaanger
jaamadagni, a rishi .
jaamadagnyam upaakhyaana .
jaambavat, the king of the bears .
jaambavati, wife of krishna and mother of shaamba . kapindraputri.
jambha1, an asura . c, . c, . d, . asura.
jambha2, a raakshasa .
jambhaka, a prince. b the son of j. lived on the banks of carmanvati, and had been spared by vaasudeva in their former hostilities, .
jambu. i on the south of nila and the north of nishadha there is a huge eternal jambu tree, named sudarshana, and aed by si, and caa. it grants every wish, and after it jambudvipa has its name the tree is, yojanas high and touches the very heavens. the circumference of a fruit of that tree measures, cubits when ripe the fruit bursts, and pours out a silvery juice which becomes a river, which passes round meru and comes to the northern kurus the drinking of that juice conduces to peace of mind, no thirst is felt ever after, nor decrepitude. on that spot there is found a species of gold, called jaambunada, used for celestial ornaments and like the complexion of indragopaka insects. the men who live there are of the complexion of the morning sun, . e, .
jambudvipa, name of the dvipa south of meru, and also of the whole circular central dvipa . i, . b, . jambukhanda, jambuparvata.
jambuka1, a warrior of skanda. u, .
jambuka2, v. shambuka.
jambuka, a warrior of skanda. u, .
. janamejaya inquired how the kurus and the paandavas and somakas fought on kurukshetra. vaishampaayana began the description of the battle. the paandavas occupied the western part, turned towards the east, beyond samantapancaka. the force was collected from the whole of jambudvipa. yudhi shthira and duryodhana fixed watchwords. seeing duryo dhana, the paancaalas were filled with joy, and blew their conches, etc. arjuna and krishna also blew their conches devadatta and paancajanya, at which the kurus were alarmed. various ill omens were beheld. both parties settled rules and made covenants regarding the different kinds of combat . vyaasa visited dhritaraashtra, and offered to grant him spiritual vision that he might witness the battle. dhritaraashtra did not like to see the slaughter of his kinsmen. vyaasa then granted it to sanjaya, that he might narrate everything to dhritaraashtra weapons would not hurt him he would come out of the battle with life. vyaasa informed dhritaraashtra of the omens, and appealed to him for peace but dhritaraashtra urged the disobedience of his sons. vyaasa enumerated to dhritaraashtra the omens that indicate victory, and recommended negotiation, as victory was uncertain . then vyaasa departed. seeing the many hundreds of millions of men that had come together at kurujaangala to lay n their very lives for the sake of the earth, dhritaraa shtra inquired of sanjaya after the attributes of earth, and the details about the countries and cities from which they had come. sanjaya discoursed on the merits of the earth, and the various classes of creatures inhabiting it. their twenty four constituents are described as gaayatri . dhritaraashtra inquired about the rivers, mountains, and provinces of the earth, and their dimensions. sanjaya spoke of the five elements and their attributes, earth being the foremost. then he began the description of the dvipa of sudarshana . sanjaya discoursed on the six mountains that extend from the eastern to the western ocean, and are the resort of si. and caa. himavat etc and the varshas between them bhaarata varsha, etc. maalyavat, gandhamaadana meru the four islands beside meru bhadraashva, etc. the bird sumukha on meru sport g as raa and aps and brahmaan, rudra, and shakra perform sacrifices tumburu, etc ae the gods with hymns the seven rishis and kashyapa repair thither on every parvan day upon the summit is ushanas with the daityas the jewels, etc come from meru, one fourth part being enjoyed by kubera, who gives only one sixteenth to men. on the northern side of meru is a forest of karni kaaras there pashupati, together with his celestial attendants and umaa, sports, bearing a chain of karnikaara flowers reaching n to his feet, and his three eyes resembling three suns the siddhas can behold him, but not persons of wicked conduct from the summit of that mountain gangaa falls n. on the western side of meru is ketumaala, and also jambukhanda, gandhamaadana . the last varsha in the north and bharatas varsha in the south are both of the form of a bow. amongst these seven varshas that which is further north excels the one to its immediate south in respect of longevity, stature, health, righteousness, pleasure, and profit. the huge mountains of hemakuta are also called kailaasa, where vaishravana lives in joy with gh. to the north of kailaasa and near the mountains of mainaaka there is the huge and beautiful mountain hiranyashringa. beside this the delightful lake bindusaras, with golden sands. raa. reside on himavat, etc. . the two dvipas naagadvipa and kashyapadvipa are the two ears of this hare shaped region the beautiful mountains of malaya, having rocks like copper plates, form another part of jambudvipa, making it resemble a hare . dhritaraashtra asked sanjaya about the regions to the north and the east side of meru, and about the mountains of maalyavat. sanjaya told about the uttarakurus . east of meru the foremost region is bhadraashva . the jambu tree . maalyavat . dhritaraashtra inquired about the names of all the varshas and mountains. sanjaya related of ramanaka, etc. . dhritaraashtra became absorbed in meditation about his sons then he said time destroys and creates everything nara and naaraayana, omniscient, destroying all creatures, the gods call him vaikuntha, men call him vishnu . dhritaraashtra asked about bhaarata varsha, about which duryodhana and the paandavas are so covetous. sanjaya said that the paandavas were not covetous about it, but duryodhana, shakuni, etc. then he mentioned in bhaarata varsha, the beloved land of indra, etc inhabited by aryans and mlecchas, the mountains mahendra, etc. rivers gangaa, etc. countries kuru paancaalaa, etc. and countries in the south dravidaa, etc. the tribes of the north mlecchaa, etc. and in the east and the north shudraabhiraa, etc. . dhritaraashtra inquired about life, strength, etc in bhaarata varsha, and of haimavata varsha and harivarsha. sanjaya related of the four yugas krita, etc. . the portion that remains of the dvaapara age is small. haimavata varsha is superior to bhaarata varsha, and harivarsha superior to haimavata varsha, in every respect .
jambumaarga, a tirtha . w, .
jaambunada, son of the elder janamejaya. .
jaambunada saras, a lake .
jaambunadaparvata, a mountain .
jambunadi, a river. f, .
jaambunadi, a river .
janadeva, v. janaka.
janaka, one or more videha kings in mithilaa . b, . b, . b, . f the brahman said king j who was desirous of punishing a brahman for an offence, forbade him to dwell within his inions. the brahman then asked him about the limits of his territories j.s understanding at first became clouded, then he said that he failed to find his inion in the king, in mithilaa, and among his own children even this body is not mine, or the whole earth is mine, and as much mine as it is of others remain as long as you please. asked by the brahman, he explained how he had come to this result, and got rid of the idea of mine all my acts are for the sake of the gods, p bh and the guests. the brahman turned out to be dharma, who described himself as emancipated, and said that j. would enter his soul, . also the following synonyms aindradyumni, . daivaraati, . dharmadhvaja, . karaala, karaalajanaka, q.v. maithila, . mithilaadhipa, . mithilaadhipati, . mithileshvara, . vaideha, videharaaja. q.v.
janaka, pl the family of janaka .
janakanripa, janakaraaja, v. janaka.
janakendra, v. janaka.
jaanaki, a prince .
janamejaya1, son of parikshit and maadravati, and the husband of vapushtamaa at his snake sacrifice vaishampaayana recited the mhbhr. for the first time . j the minor son of parikshit, is made king and married to vapushtamaa, the daughter of the kaashi king suvarnavarman, . the menial of a brahman who gathered sacrificial fuel in the banyan tree, which was burnt by takshaka and revived by kaashyapa, was equally burnt to ashes and revived, and had told to the ministers of j. what had happened between takshaka and kaashyapa. j. resolved to avenge his father and uttanka, . as there was a snake sacrifice read of in the puraana, j. caused the preparations for such a sacrifice to be made. when the sacrificial platform was being constructed, the suta lohitaaksha, versed in the rules of building, announced that both the soil and the time of the sacrifice foreboded that a brahman would come to prevent the completion of the sacrifice. j. therefore gave orders not to admit anybody with out his knowledge . b, . b, . b sauti said hearing this, at the intervals of the sacrificial rites, king j. became filled with wonder. the sacrificial priests finished the rites. aastika, having rescued the snakes, became filled with joy. j. gratified all the brahmans with copious presents, then they returned home. j. came back from takshashilaa to haastinapura, . also the following synonyms bhaarata, bharatashaardula, bharatashreshtha, bhaarataagrya, bharatarshabha, bharatasat tama, q.v. kaurava, kauravashaardula, kauravanandana, kauravendra, kauravya, q.v. kurushaardula, kurushreshtha, kurudvaha, kurukulashreshtha, kurukulodvaha, kuru nandana, kurupravira, kurupungavaagraja, kurusattama, q.v. paandava, paandavanandana, paandaveya, q.v. paarikshita, . paurava, q.v.
janamejaya2, one or more ancient kings. bis . the passages quoted here might as well refer to one of the princes mentioned under the headings janamejaya4 .
janamejaya3, a prince, contemporary of the great war .
janamejaya4, son of kuru .
janamejaya5, son of the elder parikshit . .
janamejaya6, son of puru .
janamejaya7, a king of the nipas .
janamejaya8, one or more paancaala princes in the army of yudhishthira . paancaalya.
janamejaya9, king of the mountaineers .
janamejaya1, paarikshit. b, .
janamejaya, pl. .
jaanapadi, an apsaras .
janaardana, pl. .
janasthaana, name of a place . k, . l, .
jaangala, pl a people . kurujaangala, pl.
janghaabandhu, a muni .
janghaari, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
jantu, son of king somaka .
jantupaakhyaana . questioned by yudhishthira, lomasha said king somaka had wives, but was a long time sonless. at last, when he and his wives were old, he got a son jantu, whom all the wives surrounded with the utmost care. one day when jantu had been stung by an ant at his hip and cried, somaka, afraid of losing him, inquired of his ritvij if there were a ceremony by which a man might get sons. he was told to sacrifice jantu and let his wives take a smell of the smoke of his fat then sons would be born to him, and jantu himself would be born once more of the same mother, with a mark of gold on his back . the sacrifice was performed notwithstanding the screams of the wives, and after ten months sons were born, of whom jantu was the eldest and most beloved and superior in merit, and had that mark of gold. when the guru and somaka had died, the purohita was grilled in a terrible hell for having performed that sacrifice, and somaka prevailed upon dharmaraaja that he should be likewise tormented for the same period before he entered the blessed regions. here they spent six nights .
jaanujangha, an ancient king .
. b a brahman, who was a reciter, conversant with the six angas, of the kushika race and son of pippalaada, acquired spiritual insight into the angas at the foot of himavat he was devoted to the vedas silently reciting gaayatri, he practised austerities for, years in order to attain to braahman. then gaayatri appeared and granted him the boon that his wish for recitation should go on increasing, and his absorption into meditation be more complete. she added that he should not have to go to hell, thither where great brahmans go, but to the region of brahmaan, and that dharma, etc would come to him in person. he continued engaged in recitation for, celestial years. then dharma came to him and told him to cast off his body in order to win regions of bliss but he did not wish to reside in heaven except with his body, but only took pleasure in recitation. time, mrityu, and yama came and told him the same. the brahman gave them arghya and paadya. ikshvaaku, who had set out on a tirtha yaatraa, came and was given arghya and paadya. the brahman wished to give him something ikshvaaku, as a kshatriya, would not take anything except battle, but only himself give at last, however, he asked to be allowed to enjoy the fruits of the brahmans recitations, but when the brahman consented he would not take them, and asked the brahman what those fruits were. the brahman did not know, as his recitations had never been connected with any special purpose he told the king that truth required that he should take them as he had asked for them . dharma and heaven seconded the brahman. ikshvaaku wished to give his own merits instead, but in vain then ikshvaaku agreed to accept half the brahmans merit on the condition that the brahman should take half of his own, but he was refused. at this time two ungainly individuals came there, virupa and vikrita virupa said that he owed vikrita the merits of the gift of a cow, but that vikrita refused to take repayment vikrita declared that virupa owed him nothing they asked ikshvaaku to decide the question. ikshvaaku hesitated the brahman threatened to curse him. ikshvaaku would give him some drops of water that had fallen upon his hand. virupa approved of this arrangement, and said that vikrita really did not owe him anything we appealed to thee for thy own sake. bhishma said that a reciter goes to brahmaan, or agni, or surya. whose attributes he catches stupefied by attachment and so also if he goes to soma, etc. if, however, he goes to, those regions after having freed himself from attachment, he enters the supreme and imperishable, and becomes braahman . the brahman accepted, worshipped dharma, etc and set himself to his recitations again. asked by ikshvaaku, he agreed that he should go half and half with the king. indra came there with lp saa vi etc and said to the brahman and the king that they had attained to success . those two withdrew their senses from the objects of the world fixing prana, etc in the heart, they concentrated the mind in praana and apaana united together, etc. . brahmaan welcomed the fiery flame that had issued from the head of the brahman, saying reciters attain to the same end as the yogins but as regards reciters, the honour is ordained for them that brahmaan himself shall advance to receive them then he once more imparted consciousness into that splenr the brahman then entered the mouth of brahmaan, and so did the king. the deities rejoiced. brahmaan said that so also would he that reads the great smriti and the anusmriti in this way attain to the same region with brahmaan and so also he who is devoted to yoga. then brahmaan disappeared, and the deities, having honoured dharma, returned to their respective abodes .
jaraa, a female raakshasa . grihadevi, raakshasi.
jaras, the hunter who wounded krishna .
jaraasandha1, king of the maagadhas, son of brihadratha . b, . b, . b, . baarhadratha, maagadha, magadhaadhipa, magadhaadhipati, magadheshvara.
jaraasandha2, a son of dhritaraashtra .
jaraasandhasuta . jaaraasandhi.
. as krishna thought that jaraasandha was incapable of being vanquished in battle even by all the gods and asuras, but might be vanquished in a personal struggle with bare arms, and as there was in himself policy, in bhima strength, and in arjuna ability to protect them, he thought that jaraasandha should be made to challenge bhima, and krishna therefore obtained the permission of yudhishthira that bhima and arjuna followed him. they set out in the garb of snaatakas, with bhima in the van, from the land of the kurus to the padmasaras, over kaalakuta, gandaki, mahaashona, sadaaniraa, the rivers on the ekaparvataka and purvaa koshalaa, mithilaa, maalaa, carmanvati, gangaa, shona, towards the east, dressed in garments of kusha grass, to the maagadha land. when they came to the mountain of goratha, they beheld the maagadha town . girivraja is surrounded by the five large hills of vaihaara, varaaha, vrishabha, rishigiri, and caityaka. it was there that gautama begat kaakshivat, etc upon the shudra woman aushinari, and was visited by the kings of anga, vanga, etc. there dwell the naagas arbuda, shakravaapin, svastika, and maninaaga. manu had ordered the maagadhas never to be afflicted with drought kaushika and manimat had favoured the country. the paandavas and krishna entered the city by breaking n the peak of caityaka, worshipped by the baarhadrathas and the citizens with perfumes and flower garlands, where brihadratha had slain the cannibal rishabha, and made of his hide three drums . as evil omens had been seen, the purohitas made jaraasandha mount an elephant and carried fire about him, and he entered upon a sacrifice with vows and fasts . krishna, bhima, and dhananjaya entered the city without weapons in the guise of snaatakas, snatched from the flower vens the garlands they had exposed for sale, and attired in robes of various colours and decked with garlands and ear rings they entered the abode of jaraasandha, who welcomed them, and hearing from krishna that bhima and arjuna in consequence of a vow would not speak before night, quartered them in the sacrificial apartments and retired to the palace . at midnight he came to them, as he always observed the vow, that as soon as he should hear of the arrival of snaatakas, even at midnight, he would immediately come out and grant them an audience. as he questioned them about their strange attire, which was unsuitable for snaatakas, and their breaking n the caityaka peak, and why they would not accept the worship he offered, krishna gave him some explanations, and declared that they had come as his foes . as jaraasandha said that he did not remember to have injured them, krishna told him that they were sent by yudhishthira to set at liberty the princes whom jaraasandha intended to slaughter as a sacrifice to shiva, because sacrificing human beings to the gods was never used he reminded him of the destruction of dambhodbhava, kaarta virya, uttara, and brihadratha, and challenged him to set free the monarchs or to fight. jaraasandha chose to fight, and ordered sahadeva, to be installed on the throne. then he thought of his generals kaushika and citrasena, who had formerly been hamsa and dimbhaka. krishna, remembering that, according to the command of brahmaan, jaraasandha was not to be slain by him or by the madhus, did not himself desire to slay him . jaraasandha having chosen to fight with bhima, the purohita brought pigment, garlands, etc and propitiatory ceremonies were performed by a brahman and likewise bhima, having consulted with krishna, had propitiatory ceremonies pronounced . when jaraasandha had taken off his crown and arranged his hair, they fought with their clenched fists as their only weapons. the combat began at the first day of the month kaarttika, and lasted, without intermission or food, till the thirteenth on the fourteenth night jaraasandha desisted from fatigue, and krishna obscurely intimated that he should now be killed . at the instigation of krishna, bhima threw jaraasandha into the air a hundred times, pressed his knee against his backbone and broke his body in two with a terrible roar, so that the citizens became dumb with terror and many women were prematurely delivered. leaving the lifeless body at the palace gate, they went out of the town riding on jaraasandhas celestial chariot, which krishna caused to be made ready, it being aned with a celestial flagstaff and incapable of being vanquished by any king, upon which indra and vishnu had fought in the battle about taarakaa, riding upon which indra had slain ninety nine daanavas, which had been obtained by king vasu from vaasava, from vasu by brihadratha, and from him by jaraasandha. and krishna thought of garuda, who sat upon the chariot along with the frightfully roaring creatures on its flagstaff. krishna then released his relatives and ordered them to assist yudhishthira at his raajasuya. stopping on a level plain outside the town, he was aed by the citizens, and he installed sahadeva, the son of jaraasandha, in the sovereignty of the magadhas. then they arrived at indra prastha. thereupon krishna, having taken leave of yudhi shthira, etc set out for his own city, riding upon that same celestial chariot that had been given to him by yudhishthira, the paandavas having circumambulated him
jaratkaaru1, a rishi, husband of jaratkaaru and father of aastika. sauti said the ascetic j when going about and practising religious austerities, one day saw his ancestors, the yaayaavaras, hanging, heads n, in a great hole by a rope of virana fibres, which was eaten into on all sides by a rat he was told that it was because he had no offspring. he then promised to marry, if he might get a wife of the same name as his own, and who would be given to him in charity . at last he married jaratkaaru, the sister of vaasuki, the king of serpents, who intended by this marriage to neutralize the curse inflicted on the serpents by their mother . having begotten aastika, j. ascended to heaven together with his ancestors, . etymology of the name j . the story of j. repeated and somewhat enlarged, . one day. j sleeping on the lap of his wife when the sun was setting, was awakened by her, lest the twilight should pass away without his prayers being said. j. felt insulted, as he believed that the sun had no power to set in the usual time if he was asleep. he therefore left her and again began to practise austerities, .
jaratkaaru2, sister of vaasuki, the king of serpents, wife of jaratkaaru, and mother of aastika .
jaraayu, a matri. u, .
jaritaa, a shaarngikaa, wife of mandapaala .
jaritaari, the eldest son of mandapaala and jaritaa .
jarjaraananaa, a maatri. u, .
jartika, pl a tribe of the baahikas .
jaaruthi . b, .
jataadhara1, a warrior of skanda. u, .
jataalikaa, a maatri. u, .
jataasura1, a raakshasa . rakshas, raakshasa.
jataasura2, a prince .
. one after the raakshasas with ghatotkaca had departed, while bhima was a hunting, and lomasha and the other rishis had gone away to bathe and collect flowers, the raakshasa jataasura, who had followed yudhishthira in the guise of a brahman versed in all the shaastras, with the object of possessing himself of the arms of the paandavas and of draupadi, began to flee away with the arms and draupadi and the three paandavas. sahadeva extricated himself, and snatching the sword kaushika, he began to call bhimasena. yudhishthira reproached him, saying that the raakshasas are the root of virtue and know virtue best, and that the raakshasas, gods, pitris, siddhas, rishis, gandharvas, etc depend for their lives on men, etc. yudhishthira then made himself ponderous. sahadeva was about to attack the raakshasa, when bhima appeared mace in hand. the raakshasa set them n, and he and bhima began to fight with trees, like vaalin and sugriva, and then with rocks, and at last by wrestling, till bhima, having dealt a blow on the neck of the raakshasa, lifted him up, and dashed him on the ground and severed his head from his body, and then presented himself before yudhishthira .
jataayu, a vulture, brother of sampaati .
jathara, pl. .
jaathara1, a warrior of skanda. u, .
jatilaa, a female descendant of gotama . gautami.
jatin2, a warrior of skanda. u, .
jaatismara, a tirtha .
jaatismarahrada, a tirtha .
. vaishampaayana briefly related the plan of saubala, duryodhana, dushaasana, karna, and dhrita raashtra to burn the paandavas and kunti in a lac house, and their escape. asked by janamejaya, he then began to relate it more fully. the paandavas frustrated all the plans of murdering them laid by duryodhana, etc without speaking of them, in obedience to the counsels of vidura. people began to speak in all public places of installing yudhishthira on the throne instead of dhritaraashtra. duryodhana repre sented to dhritaraashtra that this would for ever exclude himself and his brothers from the throne . duryo dhana, karna, shakuni, and dushaasana held a consultation together, and duryodhana prevailed upon dhritaraashtra to exile the paandavas to vaaranaavata . duryodhana and his brothers began gradually to win over the people to their side by grants of wealth and honours, while dhritaraashtra suggested to the paandavas to visit the festival of pashupati at vaaranaavata. fully understanding the motives of dhritaraashtra, yudhishthira let bhishma, vidura, drona, baahlika, somadatta, kripa, ashvatthaaman, bhurishravas, gaandhaari, etc give them their benedictions, and the paandavas having performed propitiatory rites in order to obtain the king, set out for vaaranaavata . duryodhana prevailed upon purocana to reach vaaranaavata that very day upon a swift chariot, and to construct a house of inflammable materials and burn the paandavas and kunti . the people, who were distressed by the departure of the paandavas, and angry with dhritaraashtra, were calmed by yudhishthira. vidura, in obscure words, warned yudhishthira, who explained the meaning to kunti. they set out on the day of the month of phaalguna when rohini was ascendant . they were received with great honours by the citizens of vaaranaavata and installed by purocana first in a palace that had been built for them, and after ten days in the lac house called shiva . yudhishthira scented the smell of fat, etc and told it to bhima, but resolved to seem unsuspicious . a miner, sent by vidura, told yudhishthira that purocana would put fire to the house on the fourteenth night of the dark lunation, and made a large subterranean passage . they lived there for a year. then on a certain night kunti fed a large number of brahmans and there came also a nishaada woman with her five sons, who became intoxicated and lay n in the house to sleep. the paandavas then set fire to the house and burnt purocana and the nishaadas, while they themselves escaped through the subterranean passage and fled in haste, bhima carrying his mother and brothers . the citizens thought they had been burnt to death . a person sent by vidura took the paandavas and kunti to the other side of the gangaa in a boat . the miner had covered the hole he had dug with ashes, and the towns people thought that the nishaada woman with her five sons were kunti and the paandavas, and sent to dhritaraashtra to inform him that they had been burnt to death together with purocana. dhritaraashtra wept in deep sorrow, and caused the funeral rites to be performed. meanwhile the paandavas having crossed the gangaa proceeded in the darkness to the south and reached a dense forest. yudhishthira then prevailed upon bhima to carry kunti and his brothers . the motion of bhimas legs raised a wind like that of the months of shuci and shukra, while he trod n the trees and swam across streams. towards evening they sat n in a terrible forest under a banyan tree. kunti was thirsty, and bhima proceeded to a pool at a distance of a gavyuti, and brought water by soaking his upper garments. when he found them sleeping from fatigue, he lamented that yudhishthira would not yet allow him to slay duryodhana, etc and sat there awake keeping watch over them .
jaatukarna, a rishi .
jaavaali, v. jaabaali.
javana, a warrior of skanda. u, .
jaya1, a son of dhritaraashtra, or an adherent of duryodhana .
jaya2, a god . jayanta.
jaya3, an ancient king .
jaya7, a serpent . u, .
jaya8, a paandava warrior .
jaya9, a paancaala prince .
jaya1 . u, .
jaya1, name of a muhurta .
jaya1, said of the mhbhr . also the intro ductory shloka of the single books, and, . do said of the episode vidulaaputraanushaasana, .
jayaashva, a paandava warrior .
jayadharman, a kuru warrior .
jayadratha1, king of the sindhus, son of vriddhakshatra . .
jayadratha2, an ancient king .
. dhritaraashtra lamented the slaughter of his troops formerly in the abode of somadatta, who was devoted to truth, used to hear delightful sounds then he mentioned krishnas ambassaship, the match at dice, that he and vidura, etc. did not approve of possessed of sovereignty, the paandavas will ever listen to the voice of shalya, etc. none can fight bhimasena, etc. only duryodhana, etc would venture to resist them he asked what the principal leaders did . sanjaya rebuked dhritaraashtra for his folly in bringing about the battle . drona arrayed his divisions. the warriors shouted in anger where is arjuna etc. . drona assured jayadratha of protection. by somadattas son, etc. . dronas array was in part a shakata and in part a circle, miles long, and the width of its rear was miles in the rear was another impenetrable array in the form of a lotus and within that a needle, in the mouth of the needle was kritavarman next came the kaamboja king, etc. behind them all was jayadratha at one side of the needle. at the head of the shakata was drona . si. and caa. wondered. duryodhana rejoiced . after the rudra hour had set in arjuna made his appearance, while portents appeared in nature. then nakulas son shataanika and dhrishtadyumna arrayed the divisions of the paandavas. durmarshana took up his position in the van in order to oppose arjuna arjuna was at the very van of his army. krishna and arjuna blew their conches. the kuru army was afraid . the fourteenth days battlr. arjuna durmarshana a terrible carnage was caused by arjuna durmarshanas division fled away . dushaasana arjuna dushaa sanas division was slaughtered and routed he sought protection with drona . arjuna met with drona and prayed for leave to slay jayadratha drona refused leave and attacked arjuna unable to vanquish drona, arjuna avoided him from fear of losing time, and penetrated into the kuru army, the paancaala princes, yudhaamanyu and uttamaujas, being the protectors of his wheels jaya, etc opposed arjuna, and so did the abhishaahas, etc with drona at their head . drona arjuna, who employed the braahma weapon. arjuna avoided drona, began to slaughter the bhojas, and took up his position between kritavarman and the kaamboja king sudakshina. arjuna kritavarman, who was stupefied arjuna proceeded to the division of the kaambojas. krita varman yudhaamanyu uttamaujas, who were prevented by kritavarman from following arjuna, who did not slay krita varman. shrutaayudha arjuna shrutaayudha attacked krishna with his mace, which returned and slew shrutaayudha himself all the troops fled away. the kaamboja king sudakshina arjuna, who slew him all the troops fled away . arjuna slew the abhishaahas, etc. . shrutaayus acyutaayus arjuna, who slew them both with the aindra weapon. niyataayus dirghaayus arjuna, who slew them both. the angas the kalinga king, etc arjuna, who caused a great carnage among them, as also among the mlecchas, yavanas, etc. . the ambastha king shrutaayus arjuna, who slew him . duryodhana addressed drona in wrath and affection. drona acknowledged his inability to oppose arjuna on account of his own old age. drona cased duryodhana in invulnerable armour and urged him to oppose arjuna with this armour he need have no fear from as y u raa men, etc. it was the armour that shiva had given to indra, by means of which he slew vritra indra angiras brihaspati agniveshya drona. it was put on, its pieces being joined with braahma strings. brahmaan had himself put it on vishnu in days of yore, and on indra in the fight about taarakaa. duryodhana trigartas, etc proceeded towards the chariot of arjuna . the paandavas somakas drona a fierce battle ensued in front of the kuru array drona dhrishtadyumna dronas host became divided into three bodies one which retreated towards kritavarman, another towards jalasandha, another towards drona himself vivimshati, etc bhima sena king baahlika the draupadeyas the govaasana chief shaibya the kaashi king the madra king shalya yudhi shthira dushaasana saatyaki sanjaya cekitaana shakuni sahadeva vinda and anuvinda viraata king baahlika shikhandin the avanti chief the sauviras and prabhadrakas dhrishtadyumna alaayudha ghatotkaca kuntibhoja and raa. alambusha. jayadratha remained in the rear, protected by kripa, etc and the protectors of his wheels were ashvatthaaman on the right and karna on the left his rear was protected by kripa, etc headed by somadattas son . drona, in front of his array, fought the paarthas. vinda and anuvinda viraata shikhandin baahlika the govaasana king shaibya the kaashi king the baahlika king the draupadeyas dushaasana saatyaki kuntibhoja alambusha nakula and sahadeva shakuni, who fled towards drona raa. ghatotkaca raa. alaayudha yudhishthira shalya vivimshati, etc bhimasena . bhimasena jalasandha yudhishthira kritavarman dhrishtadyumna drona dhrishtadyumna mounted dronas chariot, had his paarshni charioteers slain, etc but was rescued by saatyaki drona saatyaki . saatyaki drona si caa vd m. u. looked at drona acknowledged in saatyaki the force of raama, etc. g si and caa. admired him drona invoked the aagneya weapon, saatyaki the vaaruna weapon. just at that time the sun went n in his course. yudhishthira, etc drona . arjuna and krishna steadily proceeded towards jayadratha . vinda and anuvinda arjuna, who slew them both. while krishna groomed arjunas steeds, arjuna on foot held the whole kuru army in check, and piercing the earth with a weapon made a lake for his steeds to drink from, and an arrow hall for them to rest within naarada came to see the lake . the si. and caa etc applauded. the kurus fiercely attacked arjuna while he was on foot arjuna beat back all his assailants the kurus applauded his prowess, blaming duryodhana. after finishing the grooming krishna reharnessed the steeds and proceeded with great speed. duryodhana followed . the progress of arjuna became irresistible. duryodhana outran arjuna in a single chariot, and then turned back, facing krishna . krishna pointed out duryodhana to arjuna and urged him to slay him, mentioning duryodhanas injuries arjuna promised to slay him arjuna duryodhana . arjuna failed to pierce duryodhana in consequence of the latters invulnerable armour the chief of the gods gave this invulnerable armour to angiras brihaspati indra arjuna. arjuna shot strong arrows, strengthened by mantras, at duryodhana, which were cut off by ashvatthaaman this weapon could not be used again lest it should slay arjuna himself. arjuna deprived duryo dhana of his chariot, and steeds, and weapons when krishna blew paancajanya and arjuna drew gaandiva, the kurus fell n on the ground. the protectors of jayadratha attacked krishna and arjuna . bhurishravas, etc arjuna, who blew devadatta, as krishna blew paancajanya duryodhana bhurishravas, etc arjuna ashvatthaaman arjuna . sanjaya described to dhritaraashtra the standards . arjuna, assailed by many chariot warriors, slew many of them . in the afternoon the paancaalas and the paandavas the kurus brihatkshattra drona kshemadhurti brihatkshattra dhrishtaketu kshemadhurti viradhanvan dhrishtaketu yudhishthira drona vikarna nakula durmukha sahadeva vyaaghradatta saatyaki bhurishravas the draupadeyas raa. alambusha bhimasena yudhishthira drona yudhishthira displayed great heroism both he and drona invoked the braahma weapon yudhishthira, in distress, getting upon the chariot of sahadeva is borne away from the field . kshemadhurti the kaikaya prince brihatkshattra, who slew kshemadhurti viradhanvan dhrishtaketu si. and caa. wondered viradhanvan was slain by dhrishtaketu durmukha sahadeva dur mukha mounted the chariot of niramitra, who was slain by sahadeva nakula vikarna, whom he vanquished vyaaghradatta saatyaki, who slew him the magadhas saatyaki, who nearly exterminated them the kurus were routed drona saatyaki bhurishravas the draupadeyas shataanika, etc bhurishravas, who was slain by the son of sahadeva raa. alambusha bhimasena alambusha resorted to illusive tricks and caused a river of blood with raa etc wafting away countless cedis etc. bhima employed the tvaashtra weapon alambusha fled to drona . ghatotkaca alambusha both availed themselves of their illusive power the paandavas alambusha bhimasenas son, etc who was slain by ghatotkaca . yuyudhaana drona yudhishthira urged dhrishtadyumna and all his troops, headed by bhimasena, to rescue yuyudhaana yudhishthira drona, who slew many and vanquished the paandavas, etc. yudhishthira heard the sound of paancajanya and thought arjuna to be in distress he requested saatyaki to go to arjuna and bring him news of his safety arjuna had said in the dvaitavana to yudhishthira, even if krishna, etc assist us, shall yet appoint saatyaki for our aid, since there is none equal to him, and yudhishthira had witnessed his reverence for arjuna at dvaarakaa when returning from the tirthas, and at upaplavya his affection for the paandavas the day is about to end amongst the vrishnis two were regarded as atirathas pradyumna and saatyaki . saatyaki hesitated to comply with yudhishthiras request on the ground of the counter commands of arjuna the sauvirakas, etc as men, raa k m. u etc are no match for arjuna in battle. yudhishthira pressed his request, saying that bhima, etc will protect him during saatyakis absence . saatyaki agreed to obey yudhishthira the distance from here is three yojanas he would crush the elephants of the anjana breed, mounted by mlecchas, commanded by karna and devoted to dushaasana, at karnas command returning from the pursuit of arjuna and waiting for saatyaki, and also ordered by duryodhana he would also crush those elephants ridden by kiraatas and formerly given by the kiraata king to arjuna obtaining these and kripa, etc duryodhana thought lightly of the paandavas also the kaambojas are on the alert with their eyes on me. then saatyaki directed his chariot to be properly equipped shall also have to encounter the shakas. yudhishthira caused quivers, etc to be placed on saatyakis chariot then saatyaki set out with his charioteer and friend, the younger brother of daaruka. bhimasena also set out with saatyaki, but was prevailed upon by saatyaki to return and protect yudhishthira . yudhishthira followed saatyaki in order to reach the chariot of drona. dhrishta dyumna and king vasudaana urged the warriors to protect saatyaki. saatyaki made the kurus flee away. drona saatyaki, who then, like arjuna, avoided drona, pointing out to his charioteer the avantis, etc and then smiting the great host of karna. kritavarman saatyaki, who slew kritavarmans charioteer and issued out of the bhoja division, while kritavarman attacked bhimasena. yuyudhaana the kaambojas. drona pursued yuyudhaana, while the paandava host began to resist him. the paancaalas kritavarman . dhritaraashtra wondered before sanjaya that even such an army as his should be slain, and asked about what passed. sanjaya, quoting vidura, rebuked dhritaraashtra, and then related the paarthas the bhoja king kritavarman shikhandin was brought away from the battle by his charioteer kritavarman vanquished all the paarthas, etc. . saatyaki turned back to check krita varman, whom he deprived of his chariot then he broke the hostile division and proceeded on his way. saatyaki rukma ratha this elephant division fled away. the magadha king jalasandha yuyudhaana, who slew him the kurus fled away. drona yuyudhaana . drona, etc. yuyudhaana duryodhana fled away, mounting the chariot of citrasena. kritavarman yuyudhaana, who made him fall on his knees . drona saatyaki, whose driver swooned away saatyaki, acting as his own driver, continued to fight with drona, who was carried away by his steeds the troops broke. drona returned to the front of the array in order to check the paandavas . king sudarshana saatyaki, who slew him . saatyakis driver pronounced an eulogy upon him. saatyaki urged him to take him to the kaambojas yuyudhaana the yavanas, who fled away thousands of kaambojas, etc were similarly slain by saatyaki caa. and g. applauded him . yuyudhaana proceeded towards arjuna duryodhana, etc followed him behind and attacked him as he proceeded slowly an awful carnage set in duryodhanas chariot was taken away by the steeds the others then fled away. yuyudhaana proceeded towards the chariot of arjuna . dhritaraashtra wondered before sanjaya at the feats of yuyudhaana . sanjaya blamed dhritaraashtra and duryodhana, and then continued his narrative. at the command of duryodhana the samshaptakas rallying, with a number of shakas, etc attacked saatyaki dushaasana saatyaki many elephants of the race of anjana, etc were slain, and many steeds of the vanaayu race, etc and many thousands of warriors many daradas saatyaki they fled away. drona, hearing the noise, told his charioteer to take the chariot to the spot where yuyudhaana was the charioteer remarked that the paancaalas and paandavas were rushing against drona suddenly saatyaki appeared, and the broken troops and dushaasana, all struck with panic, rushed towards dronas division . drona rebuked dushaasana for his cowardice, and told him to make peace with the paandavas . dushaasana saatyaki. drona the paancaalas the paandavas, etc. drona slew the paanshaala prince viraketu, and his brothers citraketu, sudhanvan, citra varman, and citraratha dhrishtadyumna mounted dronas chariot, but was then carried away by his own steeds having caused a great carnage drona once more took up his station in the midst of his own array . dushaasana saatyaki the warriors of dushaasana fled away. duryodhana urged a body of, trigartas towards yuyu dhaana, who slew then they turned towards drona. while saatyaki was proceeding towards arjuna he was again attacked by dushaasana, who was taken up by the trigarta leader on his chariot saatyaki did not slay him, recollecting the words of bhimasena, but quickly proceeded along the track of arjuna . . and caa. wondered. bhimasena, etc the kauravas. saatyaki proceeded towards arjuna. duryodhana the paandavas duryodhana caused a great carnage. drona the paancaalas a dreadful carnage took place. then there arose a loud uproar from the place where arjuna was . in the afternoon drona the somakas brihatkshattra drona both invoked the braahma weapon brihatkshattra was slain by drona, who then slew the cedi dhrishtaketu, and then dhrishtaketus son, and the son of jaraasandha. the cedis, etc drona, who slew them, especially the foremost among the cedis. the paancaalas began to tremble and loudly called for bhimasena and dhrishtadyumna. drona slew kshatradharman, and caused cekitaana to be carried away by his steeds. drupada drona . yudhishthira was anxious at not having obtained any intelligence of arjuna and saatyaki, and thought of sending bhima after saatyaki, asking him to send him a message by uttering a leonine roar . bhima requested dhrishtadyumna to protect yudhishthira, and prepared to set out after saatyaki and arjuna the fierce blasts of paancajanya were heard, filling yudhishthira with fear. bhima broke through the head of the kuru array the paancaalas and somakas followed him behind the brothers dushala, etc he passed, and rushed against dronas division drona bhimasena bhimas mace pressed dronas chariot n into the earth drona, who had previously alighted, was saved bhima slew eleven sons of dhritaraashtra kundabhedin, etc. dhrita raashtras sons and the soldiers fled away. bhimasena then passed towards the division of drona . bhima drona bhima passing through the bhoja, etc division and beholding saatyaki, proceeded with great speed and sighted arjuna, to whom he made his presence known by a roar arjuna and krishna uttered loud roars in return yudhishthira understood that all was safe, and thought of arjunas feats . karna bhimasena karna mounted the chariot of vrishasena bhima uttered a loud roar that gratified yudhishthira. arjuna stretched gaandiva and krishna blew paancajanya . duryodhana saw drona, and affectionately chided him for his having allowed saatyaki and bhima to penetrate the kuru host and approach to the aid of arjuna. drona counselled duryodhana to make effective arrangements for the protection of jayadratha. while going back towards jayadratha, duryodhana encountered the two brothers, the paancaala princes, yudhaamanyu and uttamaujas, the protectors of the wheels of arjunas chariot, who had formerly, while arjuna penetrated the kuru host, been checked in their progress by kritavarman, and were now proceeding towards arjuna by the flank of the kuru army. uttamaujas ascended the chariot of yudhaamanyu, which duryodhana pressed n into the earth with his mace, and then duryodhana ascended the chariot of the madra king yudhaamanyu and uttamaujas, ascending two other chariots, proceeded towards arjuna . karna proceeded against bhima. dhritaraashtra inquired about the battle . sanjaya related bhima desired to avoid karna and to proceed towards arjuna karna insultingly challenged bhima, who turned back and encountered karna a fierce battle ensued between bhima and karna, whom bhima deprived of his steeds and chariot. karna mounted another chariot . continuation of the battle between karna and bhima, who recollected the woes in viraatas city, etc. . bhimas horses of the hue of bears and karnas of the hue of swans mingled together krishna and arjuna became anxious for bhima a great carnage took place . dhritaraashtras eulogy on bhima karna was capable of encountering as and men. sanjaya continued bhima again deprived karna of his steeds and driver. duryodhana dispatched his brother durjaya to rescue karna bhima slew durjaya karna wept . riding upon another chariot karna again encountered bhima, who again deprived him of his chariot. duryodhana dispatched his brother durmukha to rescue karna bhima slew durmukha, upon whose chariot karna mounted, weeping karna fled, carried away by his steeds . dhritaraashtras observations on bhimas victory over karna think destiny reigns supreme. sanjaya called dhritaraashtra the root of this destruction of the world then he related five brothers of duryodhana karna bhimasena, who slew the five brothers, resisting karna the while . karna became despondent of his life bhima again deprived karna of his steeds, driver, and bow karna once more fled on foot duryodhana dispatched other brothers of his against bhima, who slew them all . karna wept, recollecting the words of vidura then, riding upon another chariot he encountered bhima, who gladdened arjuna, etc. . karna sorrowfully surveyed the slain brothers of duryodhana, and was hard pressed by bhima, who was applauded by caa bhurishravas, etc. duryodhana dis patched seven of his brothers to the rescue of karna they were all slain by bhima bhima lamented the death of vikarna, who was dear to him. then he with a shout gladdened yudhishthira, who rushed against drona. beholding the slaughter of thirty one of his brothers by bhima, duryodhana recollected the words of vidura . bhima karna a great carnage was caused by both caa. and si. were amazed . continuation ri si g and vd. applauded the two combatants. pierced by karna, bhimas driver sought refuge in saatyakis chariot karna cut off bhimas weapons bhima leaped into the sky in order to snatch karna off his chariot karna concealed himself on his vehicle the kurus and caa. applauded bhima bhimas weapons being exhausted he fled away from karna and defended himself with the bodies of the elephants slain by arjuna but, recollecting arjunas vow, he did not take the life of karna and karna, recollecting his promise to kunti, did not take the life of bhima, whom he touched with the end of his bow and insulted with his speech. arjuna then forced karna to fly, and speeded a terrible shaft after him when he was retreating, which was cut off by ashvatthaaman, whom arjuna then forced to flee away . dhritaraashtra lamented . sanjaya related saatyaki followed bhima alambusha saatyaki, who slew him, and then proceeded, with his steeds of the sindhu breed, towards arjuna dushaasana and the dhaartaraashtras saatyaki, who slew the steeds of dushaasana, gladdening. arjuna and krishna . fifty trigarta princes saatyaki, who made them flee away, and then, passing through the shurasenas and kalingas, approached arjuna, and was eulogized by krishna. arjuna was not pleased with the arrival of saatyaki on account of his anxiety for yudhishthira . bhurishravas saatyaki they mutually addressed and challenged each other, whereafter the fight began each deprived the other of his chariot, then they fought with swords, then with fists and hands krishna urged arjuna to protect the tired saatyaki against bhurishravas, who was fresh saatyaki succumbed to bhurishravas arjuna cut off one of the arms of bhurishravas . bhurishravas rebuked arjuna for his unrighteous feat arjuna justified his conduct . bhurishravas, abaning yuyudhaana, desired to die in praaya he acknowledged the justice of arjunas plea, and was blessed by arjuna and krishna . though forbidden by krishna, etc saatyaki slew bhurishravas sitting in praaya. the warriors did not applaud saatyaki si caa men, and . applauded bhurishravas the soldiers thought that it had been ordained by the creator that it should be so. saatyaki justified his conduct, quoting vaalmiki . dhritaraashtra asked sanjaya how saatyaki could be humiliated by bhurishravas. sanjaya related the history of shini and of somadatta, and praised the vrishni heroes, vanquishers of the very daa g as y u and raa. . arjuna proceeded to jayadrathas chariot. duryodhana, etc. arjuna . duryodhana prevailed upon karna to protect jayadratha karna promised to his best duryodhana, etc. arjuna si caa and pn. applauded karna and arjuna. arjuna deprived karna of his steeds, chariot, and driver. ashvatthaaman made karna ride on his chariot. arjuna invoked the vaaruna weapon he caused a great carnage . arjuna employed the aindra weapon, etc. . arjuna jayadratha arjuna cut off jayadrathas standard and slew his driver jayadratha was placed by six chariot warriors in their midst. krishna covered the sun by means of his yoga power, so that all, except arjuna, thought the sun to have set, and he urged arjuna to cut off jayadrathas head without delay arjuna caused such a carnage that the warriors abaned jayadratha in fear and fled away krishna again urged arjuna to cut off jayadrathas head without delay, telling him of jayadrathas father vriddha kshatra, who was still engaged in penances outside samantapancaka arjuna should make the head fall upon the lap of vriddhakshatra himself, lest his own head should crack in pieces this arjuna did, and as the head fell n from vriddhakshatras lap the latters head split into pieces. krishna then withdrew the darkness created by him krishna and arjuna blew their conches, and bhima, by a tremens shout, communicated to yudhishthira the message of victory. yudhishthira drona, after the sun had set and arjuna fought with many mighty chariot warriors . kripa ashvatthaaman arjuna kripa was carried away by his driver, and ashvatthaaman fled. arjuna, grieved at kripas death like swoon, karna arjuna saatyaki the two paancaala princes . krishna told arjuna to avoid karna because the latter had yet the lance that indra had given him. karna saatyaki yudhaamanyu and uttamaujas karna such a battle had never been heard of even between g as u or raa. g and daa. looked at saatyaki slew karnas charioteer and steeds. vrishasena, etc saatyaki. karna ascended the chariot of duryodhana. saatyaki did not slay the dhaarta raashtras on account of the vow of bhimasena. ashvatthaaman, kritavarman, etc were all vanquished by saatyaki with only one bow in this world there are only three mighty bowmen krishna, arjuna, and saatyaki, said sanjaya. the younger brother of daaruka soon brought another chariot to saatyaki saatyaki ascended it, and daaruka went to krishna. a new chariot was brought for karna also. sanjaya told dhritaraashtra that thirty one of his sons had been slain by bhimasena, etc. . insulted by karna, bhima addressed arjuna in order to induce the latter to permit him to slay karna arjuna rebuked karna, and vowed to slay his son vrishasena in his presence. krishna congratulated arjuna, who attributed the victory to krishna krishna pointed out to arjuna the results of that days battle then he blew paancajanya and went and informed yudhishthira . krishna congratulated yudhishthira, who attributed the success to krishnas grace krishna and arjuna once more congratulated him then bhima and saatyaki, whom yudhishthira congratulated and embraced . duryodhanas despondency and cheerless address to drona, whom he censured for treating arjuna leniently it seems that karna only now wishes us victory . dronas reply to duryodhana he vowed to slay all the paancaalas before fing his armour he asked duryodhana to tell ashvatthaaman to avenge himself on the somakas, etc even at the risk of his life. then he proceeded against the paandavas . duryodhana communicated to karna his suspicions about dronas sincerity karna removed duryodhanas suspicions of drona, and attributed the ill success of the kurus to destiny. meanwhile the paandava divisions appeared for battle, and a fierce battle ensued .
. bhima seized jayadratha by the hair, and holding him high up in the air thrust him on the ground, etc and regretted that yudhishthira had forbidden to kill him. he then with his arrow shaved jayadrathas head, leaving only five tufts of hair, and made him promise to say in public assemblies, am the slave of the paandavas. they then bound him and thrust him into the chariot then they drove towards the hermitage and presented him to yudhishthira. yudhishthira and draupadi set him free with his army. jayadratha went to gangaadvaara, and pleased shiva so that he deigned to accept his offerings in person and granted him a boon. jayadratha asked that he might be able to defeat in battle all the five paandavas on their chariots. this shiva declared to be impossible, as arjuna was invincible, and was protected by krishna, who was vishnu . shiva then briefly reminded jayadratha of four incarnations of vishnu . thou shalt, however, be able to vanquish for a single day only the rest of yudhishthiras forces and the four paandavas, but not arjuna. then shiva vanished with umaa, jayadratha returned home, and the paandavas continued to dwell in kaamyaka .
jayaanika1, a paandava warrior .
jayaanika2, a paandava warrior .
jayanta1, son of indra and shaci .
jayanta3, a paancaala prince .
jayanta4, a rudra .
jayanta6, one of the aadityas .
jayanti, a river .
jayapriya, a paandava warrior .
jayapriyaa, a maatri. u, .
jayaraata, a kuru warrior .
jayasena1, a maagadha prince . jayatsena1.
jayasena2, a son of dhritaraashtra . jayatsena4.
jayatsena1, a maagadha king, the son of jaraasandha . jaaraasandhi, maagadha.
jayatsena2, son of sarvabhauma and sunandaa kaikeyi .
jayatsena3, one of the occult names which yudhishthira gave to the paandavas .
jayatsena4, a son of dhritaraashtra . kaurava.
jayatsenaa, a maatri. u, .
jayaavati, a maatri. u, .
jhillin, a vrishni prince .
jillika, pl a people .
jimuta2, name of an athlete .
jimuta3, a rishi .
jishnu3, a paandava warrior .
jishnukarman, a paandava warrior .
jitaari, son of avikshit and grandson of kuru .
jitaatman, a vishvadeva .
jivala, a charioteer of king rituparna .
jnaanapaavana, a tirtha .
jrimbhaka, pl a kind of being .
jvaalaa, daughter of takshaka .
jvaalaajihva, a companion of skanda. u, .
jvalanaastra . aagneya2.
jvara . b, foll.
. b bhishma said in days of yore there was a summit of meru, named jyotishka, belonging to savitri . there shiva used to sit with paarvati, waited upon by etc. . after some time the prajaapati daksha commenced to perform a sacrifice, whither all the gods headed by indra, with the permission of shiva, repaired mounted on their chariots, proceeding to that spot whence the gangaa is said to issue. paarvati asked why shiva did not himself proceed thither, and was told that in days of yore the deities made an arrangement in consequence of which no share was assigned to shiva of offerings in sacrifices. he was filled with grief. shiva ordered nandin to wait there, and summoning all his yoga force, he, with all his terrible followers, came and destroyed that sacrifice it assumed the form of a deer and tried to fly away through the skies, pursued by shiva with bow and arrow. a drop of sweat fell from his forehead n on the earth there appeared a terrible fire, whence issued a dreadful being of very short stature, etc who consumed the embodied form of sacrifice and then attacked . and ri who fled in all directions. the earth began to tremble, etc. brahmaan appeased shiva by promising him a share of the sacrificial offerings the being that had sprung from his sweat should be distributed among all creatures as fever . blessing upon the reader .
jyaishtha, name of a month .
jyeshtha1, a brahman. b, saamavedagatam dvijam jnaamaabhivikhyaatam, obtained the cult of naaraayana from the barhishads and communicated it to king avikalpana
jyeshthaa, a nakshatra . b, . aindra.
jyeshthapushkara, a tirtha . pushkara.
jyeshthasaaman, name of a saaman. b, vrato hariupamanyusung by naaraayanaaanushaasanik.ga
jyeshthasthaana, a tirtha .
jyeshthila, a tirtha .
jyeshthilaa, a river .
jyotika, a serpent . jyotishka.
jyotirathaa, a river . next.
jyotirathyaa, a river . the prec.
jyotis1, son of the vasu ahas .
jyotis2, a companion of skanda .
jyotis, pl selected passages, .
jyotishka1, a serpent . jyotika.
jyotishka2, a weapon .
jyotishka3, a summit of meru. b, .
jyotsnaakaali, a daughter of soma . somaputri.
kabandha1, a raakshasa .
kabandha2, the trunk of raahu, .
kaca, a brahman, the son of brihaspati. janamejaya said how did yayaati get devayaani vaishampaa yana related in the many battles between the gods and the asuras, the gods had for their purohita brihaspati aangirasa, and the asuras ushanas kaavya . as ushanas, by his science sanjivini, restored the fallen daanavas to life, and brihaspati was unable to revive the fallen gods, the gods prevailed upon brihaspatis son kaca to repair to ushanas and conciliate him and his daughter devayaani and learn the sanjivini. k. then repaired to the capital of vrishaparvan, the king of the daanavas, and promising to practise brahma carya for, years he was accepted by ushanas as his pupil. young as he was he, by singing and dancing and playing on instruments, etc soon gratified devayaani. after years the daanavas, having discovered who he was, slew him, and one time hacked his body to pieces and gave it to wolves and jackals, another time they pounded it into paste and mixed it with the waters of the ocean, but both times devayaani prevailed upon ushanas to restore k. to life by the sanjivini, summoning him and saying, come. then slaying him for the third time they burned the body and mixed the ashes with the wine which ushanas drank. as devayaani again asked her father to revive k ushanas said it is of no use, as he is always killed again thou art always worshipped by the braahman, the brahmans, the gods including indra, the vasus, the ashvins, the enemies of the gods and the whole world, therefore not grieve for a mortal. as devayaani said she would starve, shukra imparted the sanjivini to k who, though reduced to powder, remembered everything. k. then came out, ripping open the stomach of shukra and then revived shukra by the sanjivini. ushanas declared that henceforth that brahman who would drink wine should be reckoned to have committed the sin of slaying a brahman. k. stayed with shukra for, years . when k. was about to return to the gods devayaani asked him to become her husband, and as he refused she cursed him, saying that his science should bear no fruit. k. again cursed devayaani, saying that no rishis son should take her hand, and that his science should bear fruit, if not to himself, at least to him to whom he might impart it. then he went to the abode of indra, and the gods declared that he should become a sharer with them in sacrificial offerings, . angirasa pautra, aangirasa, brihaspatisuta.
kaccha, pl a people .
kacchapa, a serpent .
kaashapaundra, pl a people .
kasheraka, a yaksha .
kaashi, pl a people . d, . e, . g, . b, .
kaashisha1, contemporary with the great battle .
kaashishvarasya tirtha .
kaashin, a son of kavi. b, .
kaashipati1, the father of ambaa, ambikaa, and ambaalikaa . kaashiraaja.
kaashipati2, contemporary of the great battle . kaashiraaja5, kaashya2.
kaashiraaja1, one or more princes .
kaashiraaja2, the father of ambaa, ambikaa, and ambaalikaa . kaashipati1.
kaashiraaja3, the father of the two wives of brihadratha .
kaashiraaja5, contemporary of the great battle . abhibhu, kaashipati2, kaashya2.
kaashmira, pl a people . kaashiniraka, pl.
kaashmira, adj .
kaashmiraka, adj. .
kaashmiraka, pl a people, = kaashmira, pl .
kaashmiramandala . b, .
kaashya1, the father of ambaa, ambikaa, and ambaalikaa . kaashipati, kaashiraaja.
kaashya2, the kaashi king at the time of yudhishthira . abhibhu, kashipati2, kashiraaja5.
kaashya4, a rishi .
kaashya, pl a people. = kaashi, pl .
kaashyapa, a rishi and prajaapati, son of marici. sauti related kadru and vinataa, the daughters of prajaapati, obtained from their husband k. the boon that kadru would have, snakes as her offspring, and vinataa two sons, who would surpass the, sons of kadru. then k. went to the forest. after a long time kadru brought forth, eggs and vinataa two. after years the, eggs of kadru burst, but the twins of vinataa did not yet appear. vinataa then broke one of the eggs, and out came aruna . his lower extremities were yet undeveloped, and he cursed his mother, saying that she should serve as a slave, but be delivered by her other son, if she would wait years patiently without breaking the egg. after the expiration of the years garuda came out of the egg, . b, . e, . d, . u, . bb, . b, . b, married thirteen daughters of dakshaprajaapati, called krishna vrishaakapibhangaasvanop.sya sc. putraa suraasuraasya suraash caiva asuraash ca sutaas tathaaaanushaasanik.praised shivamaharshir api caitad vai maarica ko b. kaa bravitmaharshe, sesame seeds sprung from the limbs of k.suvarnotpattimaaricaaanushaasanik.mahaan rishi, among the masters of yogabisastainyop. etymology of his name shapa thavidhi umaa maheshvarasamv.husband of aditibalaraamasuparna... ksyaatmaja, i.e. garudaaanushaasanik.among the seven gurus of dhaneshvara in the northpavanaarjunasamv.tyaktvaa mahitvam naasham jagaama, page3 b samaahitakaashyapikaashyapiaanushaasanik.maaricagurushishyasamv.
kaashyapa1, one or more brahmarshis of kashyapas race . g, . kashyapa and the following headings.
kaashyapa7, name of a fire .
kaashyapa, dual, = yaja and upayaja, .
kaashyapa, pl. . b, .
kaashyapanandana, pl. = the gods, .
kaashyapeya, pl. = the aadityas, .
kaadraveya, pl. = the serpents . kadruja, pl kadruputra, pl naaga, pl sarpa, pl.
kadru, daughter of daksha, wife of kashyapa, and mother of the serpents . b after a long time k. brought forth, eggs, which burst after years, . once k. and vinataa bet about the colour of uccaishravas, and she who lost should become the others slave, vinataa asserting that he was all white, k. that he was black in his tail. k. ordered her sons to transform themselves into black hair and cover the horses tail. when they refused she cursed them, saying that the fire should consume them at the snake sacrifice of janamejaya. seeing that the snakes had multi plied exceedingly, brahmaan, with all the gods, sanctioned this curse, which had been indicated in the puraanas, and propitiated kashyapa by bestowing upon him the knowledge of neutralizing poisons, . in the morning k. and vinataa went to inspect uccaishravas. description of samudra, . the naagas, notwithstanding their refusal, went and became hairs in the horses tail. second description of the ocean, v. samudra darshana, . vinataa, having lost the wager, became the slave of k. garuda, .
kadruja, pl. = the serpents . kaadraveya, pl kadruputra, pl.
kadruputra, pl. = the serpents . kaadraveya, pl kadruja, pl.
kahoda, a brahman, father of ashtaavakra .
kaishika, pl a people .
kaikaya, pl name of a people, especially five brothers who joined yudhishthira . kaikeya pl kekaya pl.
kaikaya4, a king of the kekayas . kaikeya, kaikeyaraaja.
kaikayaraajaputra, pl. .
kaikeya, pl in most passages denoting five brothers, sons of the king of the kekayas, but sometimes the people . kaikaya pl kekaya pl.
kaikeya, dual. = vinda and anuvinda, .
kaikeya4, one or more kekaya princes .
kaikeyi, wife of ajamidha .
kaikeyi, wife of dasharatha .
kailaasa, a mountain, the abode of kubera and shiva . b, . d the mountain k. is six yojanas high, there the gods assemble, there is vishaalaa, there live innumerable yakshas, raakshasas, kinnaras, naagas, suparnas, and gan dharvas, near the abode of kubera, . d beyond k. is the path of the all perfect devarshis, if anyone goes beyond this the raakshasas slay him with iron darts and other weapons, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, .
kailaasa, pl v. kosala, pl.
kailaasaka, a serpent .
kailaataka, adj .
kairaata, adj. . b, .
kairaata, pl a people, = kiraata, pl .
kairaataka, adj. . also kailaataka.
kairaataparvan, the rd of the minor parvans of mhbhr forming an episode to arjunas journey to the abode of indra . . it is anew related how arjuna set out from the kaamyaka wood towards the north he entered a terrible forest, resorted to by siddhas and caaranas, and then proceeded to the himavat . for four months he practised austerities, until the rishis made representations about it to shiva, who dismissed them after having removed their fears . then shiva with his bow and arrows, in the guise of a kiraata, accompanied by umaa in the guise of a kiraata woman, by merry spirits, and thousands of women, approached arjuna as he was about to kill muka, a son of danu, who in the form of a boar would have killed arjuna. arjuna and shiva at the same time pierced muka with their arrows, and killed him when dying he again assumed his raakshasa form then they fought against each other, first with arrows, then with the very bows, then with swords, then with trees and stones, then with the fists, and then by clasping each other at last arjuna lost his senses, and was almost reduced to a ball of flesh when he regained consciousness he made a clay image of shiva, which he worshipped with a garland, which then appeared on the head of the kiraata he thus learned that it was shiva, and prostrated himself at his feet. shiva declared that arjunas prowess was equal to his own, promised to give him his weapon, and gave him eye, so that he beheld him in his true form, together with umaa. arjuna then fell on his knees and worshipped him, saying o kapardin etc. . shiva said that arjuna was in a former life nara, etc. when granted a boon, arjuna asked shiva to give him the paashupata weapon named brahmashiras . having purified himself he was instructed in its use on the condition that he should not hurl it against a human being, for then it would destroy the universe. the earth trembled, etc. the gods and daanavas beheld the weapon in its bodily shape standing by the side of arjuna. when arjuna had been touched by shiva, all that was evil in his body was dispelled. having said to arjuna, go thou into heaven, shiva went up into the skies accompanied by umaa . then arjuna was on the himavat visited by the lokapaalas, viz varuna, together with rivers, naagas, daityas, and saadhyas kubera, who dwells on kailaasa, golden coloured, accompanied by yakshas yama, with staff in hand, illuminating the three worlds, and the guhyakas, gandharvas, and nagaas, accompanied by those lords of the creation the pitris further shakra, with maahendraani, mounted on the neck of airaavata, and surrounded by the gods, and eulogized by gandharvas and rishis. each of them occupied a particular summit of himavat . they granted him sight, that he might see them. yama said that arjuna would defeat the nivaatakavacas, etc and gave him his irresistible staff as a weapon. varuna gave him his irresistible nooses. kubera said that in bygone kalpas arjuna had always gone through ascetic austerities along with them, and gave him his favourite weapon antardhaana . indra said he would descend to earth in his chariot with maatali as his charioteer, and taking him to heaven grant him all his celestial weapons .
kaitabha, a daanava. b, . ee, . b, . b, .. asura, daanava .
kaitava, pl. a people . kaitavya, pl.
kaitavya, pl a people .
kaivarta, pl name of a caste, .
kaaka, pl a people .
kaaki, one of the mothers of shishu .
kaksha, pl a people .
kakshaka, a serpent .
kakshasena, name of one or more princes o raajarshi vashishthaaya mahaatmane nyaasam yathaavat samnyasya jagaama sumahaayashaapage3 a raajarshi, enumerationanugitaap.had attained to high success by way of gifts
kaksheyu, a prince .
kakshivat, a rishi . next and prec.
kaakudika, name of a weapon .
kakutstha, an ancient king in ayodhyaa .
kaala, etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc . antaka, mrityu, yama.
kaalaa, daughter of daksha and wife of kashyapa .
kala, pl a class of pitris .
kalaa, pl . do. = shiva .
kalasha, a serpent .
kaalashaila, a mountain . kaalaparvata.
kalashapotaka, a serpent .
kalashi, a tirtha .
kalashodara, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kalada, pl a people .
kaaladantaka, a serpent .
kaalaghata, a brahman .
kalahamsa, pl. .
kaalajoshaka, pl a people .
kaalakaa, a female asura . kaalaa.
kaalakaaksha1, a daitya .
kaalakaaksha2, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kaalakanja or kaalakhanja, pl a tribe of asuras . d, . d, . kaalakeya, pl.
kaalakantha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kaalakavrikshiya, a muni .
kaalakeya, pl a tribe of asuras amshaavat.the offspring of kaalaa, four are enumeratedsabhaakriyaap.yathaasuraan kaan devo vajradhara, sc. kampayaam aasaagastyop.followed vritranivaataka vacayuddhap.in hiranyapura, kaalakanja, pl.sainyaniryaanap.daanavai, had been vanquished by arjuna, abhimanyuvadhap.had been slain by arjunajayadrathavadhap.sahasraani caturdasha, karnap.had been slain by arjunasa kaan asuraan, purvam devair ajitam kai, sc. arjunasamvartta maruttiyapravraa jayeyam kaan prithivyaam, says indra
kaalakhanja, pl v. kaalakanja, pl.
kaalakirti, a prince .
kaalakoti, a tirtha .
kaalakuta1, a poison . kaalakutaka.
kaalakuta2, a mountain .
kaalakuta, pl a people, the inhabitants of kaalakuta .
kaalaamra, a tree in the varsha bhadraashva. h, .
kaalamukha, pl a people .
kaalanemi, an asura .
kaalanjara, a mountain . . p, .
kalaapa, a muni .
kalaapagraama, a city .
kaalaparvata, a mountain . kaalashaila.
kaalapatha, a son of vishvaamitra .
kaalaprishtha, a serpent .
kaalasaahvaya, a hell .
kalasodara, v. kalashodara.
kaalatirtha, a tirtha .
kaalatoyaka, pl a people .
kaalava, pl a people .
kaalavega, a serpent .
kaalavinka, a tirtha .
kaalayavana, a prince. b, .
kaalehikaa, a matri. u, .
kaaleya, pl a tribe of asuras . asura, kaalakeya, pl.
kali1, name of the fourth yuga . b, . b, . b, . kaliyuga.
kali2, a term of dice and name of ill luck in general . kali1.
kali3, a devagandharva .
kali4, = surya, .
kali5, = shiva .
kaalikaa, a goddess .
kaalikaa, a river .
kaalikaa, a maatri. u, .
kaalikaashrama, a tirtha .
kaalikaasangama, v. kaalikaa.
kaalikeya, a kuru warrior, son of subala .
kalinda, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kalinda, pl. v. kalinga, pl.
kalinga2, the king of the kalingas at the time of yudhishthira . kaalinga.
kalinga3, a warrior of skanda u, .
kalinga, pl a people . d, . c . e, . g, . kaalinga, pl.
kaalinga1 . kalinga, kalingaadhipa, kalingaadhipati, kalingaka, kaalingaka, kalingaraaja.
kalingaadhipa . kaalinga.
kalingaadhipati . kaalinga.
kalingaka . kaalinga.
kaalingaka . kaalinga.
kalingaraaja . kaalinga.
kaaliya, a serpent .
kaaliyaka, a serpent .
kaliyuga, the fourth yuga . . in the k. only a quarter of virtue abides, naaraayana is black, etc . kali1.
kalkala, pl a people .
kalkin, a brahman. when the sun, the moon, and brihaspati simultaneously enter the constellation of pushya, the krita age will begin again, and commissioned by time a brahman named kalkin vishnuyashas, born in sambhalagraama, in the house of a brahman, will, surrounded by brahmans, exterminate all the mleccha crowds . having exterminated the thieves and the robbers, k. will, at a great horse sacrifice, duly give away this earth to the brahmans and then enter a delightful forest, and the kritayuga will be re established. this is said in the puraana which is narrated by vaayu, . b, .
kalmaasha, a serpent .
kalmaashapaada, saudaasa, king of ayodhyaa and husband of madayanti . the raajarshi of the race of ikshvaaku kalmaashapaada once when hunting met the viprarshi shaktri, the eldest of vasishthas sons, and ordered him to stand out of his way, and as shaktri did not yield k. struck him with his whip. shaktri then cursed him, saying from this day thou shalt be a raakshasa, eating human flesh. the king began humbly to propitiate the rishi, but vishvaamitra passed before them without being seen, and caused a raakshasa named kinkara to enter the king. vishvaamitra then went away. at this time a hungry brahman beheld in the wood k who was terribly afflicted by the raakshasa, and asked the king for some food with meat. k. asked him to stay there for a moment, and having roved for some time at pleasure at last entered his inner apartments. when waking at midnight and remembering his promise, he summoned his cook, and as the cook did not find any meat k. said feed him with human flesh. the cook then took human flesh from the place where the executioners were, and offered it to the hungry brahman. seeing with his spiritual power of vision what kind of food it was, the brahman in anger said that the king himself should take a fancy to such food and wander over all the earth alarming all creatures. the curse on the king, being thus repeated a second time, became very strong, and possessed by the raakshasa the king lost all his senses. a while after k beholding shaktri, in order to revenge him self for the curse slew him and ate him up. and vishvaamitra caused that raakshasa also to devour the other sons of vasishtha, . b, .
kalmaashapadasaras, v. kalmaashapaada.
kalmaashi, a river .
kaalodaka, a tirtha. b, . i by bathing in k. and nandikunda and uttaramaanasa, etc one is cleansed from the sin of fลticide, .
kalyaani, a maatri. u, .
kaama1 . b, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms ananga, . jagatpati, q.v. kandarpa, . makaradhvaja, q.v. manmatha, . manobhava, . samkalpaja, . smara, .
kaama2, name of a fire .
kaama3, a companion of skanda. u, .
kaamaa, daughter of prithushravas and wife of ayutanaayin .
kaamacari, a maatri. u, .
kaamadaa, a maatri. u, .
kaamaakhya, a tirtha .
kamalaa, a maatri. u, .
kamalaaksha1, a kuru warrior .
kamalaaksha2, an asura. d, .
kamalaakshi, a maatri. u, .
kaamanda, a rishi .
kaamaratha, a paandava warrior .
kamatha1, a king .
kamatha2, a rishi .
kaamathaka, a serpent .
kambala1, a serpent .
kambala2, a tirtha . the prec.
kambala3, a varsha on kushadvipa .
kaamboja, pl a people . b, .
kaamboja4, an ancient king .
kaamboja, adj. .
kampa1, a vrishni prince.
kampana, a king .
kampanaa, a river .
kaampilya, the capital of the paancaalas . b, .
kamsa, son of ugrasena, king of mathuraa, enemy of krishna . f, . b, . bhojaraaja, ugrasenasuta.
kaamyaa, an apsaras .
kaamyaka1, name of a forest kirmiravadhap.m naama tad vanamsaubhavadhop.kaamyakavanapravesham naama tad vanamindralokaabhigamanap.vanamnalopaa khyaanap.tirthayaatraap.dhaumyatirthak.vanetirthayaatraap.bhimakadalikhandapr.aashrameaashramamyaksha yuddhap.nivaatakavaca yuddhap.aashramammaarkaandeyas.vanammrigasvapnodbhavap.kaananottamamdraupadi haranap.jayadrathavimokshanap.pativrataamaahaatmyap.karnaaashramaataaraneyap.ghatotkacavadhap.
kaamyaka2, a lake .
. as yudhishthira declared that bhurishravas, shala, jalasandha, etc and karna, and the dhaartaraashtras, together with the kings who had been injured by the paandavas, could not now be vanquished, that all the kaurava soldiers and their families had been honoured with wealth and luxuries by duryodhana, and would sacrifice their lives for him, and that, although bhishma, drona, and kripa, all knowing celestial weapons and being invincible, behaved equally towards both parties, they would certainly, to pay off the royal favours they enjoyed, lay n their very lives in battle, bhima remained silent. while they were conversing thus vyaasa appeared, and, taking yudhishthira into a corner, taught him, after he had purified himself, the science of pratismriti, by means of which arjuna should proceed to mahendra, rudra, varuna, kubera, and yama, to receive weapons from them. he also advised him to go to some other forest in order not to cause uneasiness to the ascetics and exterminate the deer and destroy the plants. then vyaasa disappeared. the paandavas went to the forest of kaamyaka on the banks of the sarasvati, followed by numerous brahmans versed in shikshaa and akshara, and lived there devoted to the dhanurveda, and sacrificing to the pitris, the gods, and the brahmans .
kanakadhvaja, a son of dhritaraashtra .
kanakaaksha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kanakaangada, a son of dhritaraashtra . kanakadhvaja.
kanakaparvata, said of mahaameru, .
kanakaapida, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kanakaavati, a maatri. u, .
kanakaayu, a son of dhritaraashtra . karakaayu.
kanakhala, name of a tirtha . f, . the next.
kanakhala, pl a range of mountains . the prec.
kaanana, pl .
kaancana, a companion of skanda. u, .
kaancanaaksha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kaancanaakshi, one of the seven sarasvatis. i, .
kaanci, pl a people . the next.
kaancya, pl a people .
kandaraa, a maatri. u, .
kandarika, a brahman. b, .
kanduti, a maatri. u, .
kanika, the minister of dhritaraashtra .
kanikavaakya . . dhritaraashtra consulted the minister kanika, who, after having expounded some very machiavellian principles of policy, and told the fable of the jackal, the tiger, the mouse, the wolf, and the mongoose, concluded by advising him to destroy the paandavas .
. b the sauvira king shatrunjaya questioned ri. bhaaradvaaja about the acquisition of profit, etc and was taught by him the king should have the rod of chastise ment always uplifted in his hands the different other duties of the king. shatrunjaya obeyed these instructions and obtained prosperity .
kanka1, an ancient king .
kanka2, a vrishni prince . kampa1.
kanka3, the name which yudhishthira assumed when he lived disguised as a brahman in the palace of viraata . vaiyaaghrapadya.
kanka, pl a people .
kankanaa, a maatri. u, .
kantakini, a maatri. u, .
kaantaaraka, pl a people .
kaanti, pl a people .
kaantika, pl a people .
kanva, a rishi . b, . c, . kaashyapa.
kanvaashrama, a tirtha .
kanyaa, a tirtha .
kanyaashrama, a tirtha .
kanyaahrada, a tirtha .
kanyakaaguna, pl a people .
kaanyakubja, a city, the present kanauj . b, .
kanyaakupa, a tirtha. h by bathing in k. and balaakaa one acquires great fame among the gods, .
kanyaasamvedya, a tirtha . kanyaa.
kanyaatirtha, one or more tirthas .
kapa, pl a class of demons. p vaayu said when the gods with indra were in the mouth of mada, cyavana took away from them the earth, and they had been deprived of the heaven by the k. brahmaan told the gods to seek the protection of the brahmans. the brahmans commenced a rite for the destruction of the k. the k. then sent dhanin, who told the brahmans to desist, as the k. were equal to m. ri. and very pious in all respects . as the brahmans refused, the k. attacked them, but the brahmans destroyed them by creating blazing fires. the gods having slain many daa. in battle did not know that the k. had been slain by the brahmans, but were informed by naarada then their energy increased and they obtained immortality, .
kapaalamocana, a tirtha . k, .
kapaalin, name of a rudra .
kapardin, pl. = the rudras, .
kapata, an asura .
kaapi, a river .
kapila1, a rishi, promulgator of the saankhya system and identified with vishnu . . b, . c, . b, . b, . g, .
kapila2, a serpent king .
kapilaa, daughter of daksha and wife of kashyapa .
kapilaa, a river .
kapilaa, a brahman woman, wife of aasuri. b, .
kaapila, a varsha in kushadvipa .
kaapila, adj. . b, . b, .
kaapila, pl. = the saankhyas, .
kapilaashva, a king .
kapilaahrada, a tirtha .
kapilasya kedaara, a tirtha .
kapilaatirtha, a tirtha .
kapilavata, a tirtha .
kapinjalaa, a river .
kapishtalasya kedaara, a tirtha .
kapota1, a suparna, son of garuda .
. b bhaargava related a cruel fowler was surprised in the forest by a great storm the paths of the forest were all submerged he caught a she pigeon and immured her in a cage when the sky cleared he passed the night under a tree, having bowed n to the deities that had this tree for their resort . in one of the branches of that tree the male pigeon lamented the loss of his wife . the she pigeon answered him from within the hunters cage, telling him to the duties of hospitality to the fowler . the male pigeon welcomed the fowler, who was stiff with cold, by igniting a fire as the fowler was hungry, the pigeon him self entered the fire, at which the fowler became terrified, thinking of his own cruel life, expressed his repentance, and set at liberty the she pigeon, etc. . the she pigeon lamented for the death of her spouse then she threw herself into the blazing fire the couple of pigeons ascended to heaven . the fowler took to rigid penances, perished in a forest conflagration, and beheld him self in heaven in splenr like indra among y. and g. and si. .
kapotaroman, one or more princes .
kaapoti, a brahman. b, .
karabha, a king, .
karabhanjaka, pl a people .
karahaataka, a country .
karaka, pl a people .
karakaaksha, a kuru warrior .
karakarsha, a paandava warrior .
karakaayu, a son of dhritaraashtra . kanakaayu.
karaala1, a devagandharva .
karaaladanta, a rishi .
karaalajanaka, a king . janaka, karaala.
karaalaaksha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
karambhaa, daughter of the kalinga king and wife of akrodhana .
karana, pl name of a caste .
karandhama, an ancient king, grandfather of marutta . b, .
kaarandhama1, a tirtha .
kaarapavana, a tirtha .
kaaraskara, pl a people .
karata, pl a people .
karatoyaa, a river . e, . next.
kaaraavara, name of a caste, .
karavira, a serpent .
karavirapura, a city. t, .
kardama1, a serpent .
kardama2, a prajaapati . b, .
kardamila, a sacred place .
karenumati, daughter of the cedi king and wife of nakula paandava .
karishaka, pl a people .
kaarishi, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
karishini, a river .
kariti, pl a people .
karkakhanda, pl a people .
karkara, a serpent .
karkotaka, a serpent .
karkotaka, pl a people .
karmin, a son of shukra .
karna1, son of surya with kunti, ated by the suta adhi ratha and his wife raadhaa, and the counsellor of duryodhana . b k. was born of kunti and surya, with his armour and ear rings, . b when kunti had thrown her child into the water, it was taken up by the husband of raadhaa and called vasushena. he grew very strong and soon mastered the vedaangas there was nothing he would not give to the brahmans. in order to benefit arjuna, indra in the guise of a brahman obtained his ear rings and armour, and in return gave him a lance with which he could slay any one amongst gods, asuras, men, gandharvas, and raakshasas. because he took off his natural armour and ear rings he was called vaikartana karna. he was the friend and counsellor of duryodhana, . c when the exhibition had nearly ended there was heard proceeding from the gate the slapping of arms like to the roar of thunder. then k. proceeded with his natural mail and ear ring and bowed to drona and kripa. having spoken disdainfully to arjuna, at which duryodhana was filled with delight, he then, with the permission of drona, did all that arjuna had e before. duryodhana and his brothers in joy embraced k. k. asked for a single combat with arjuna, who rebuked him. drona gave his consent to the encounter. indra covered arjuna with clouds, while the sun dispersed the clouds from k who remained visible, surrounded by the rays of the sun. when kripa asked k. to tell his lineage k. was ashamed, but duryodhana immediately installed k. king of the angas . then adhiratha entered the lists and embraced k. as his son bhimasena, seeing this, scoffed at k. as the son of a charioteer, but was reprimanded by duryodhana . when the sun went n duryodhana led k. out of the arena. kunti had recognized k. as her son and was pleased at his success. duryodhana banished his fear of arjuna when he had obtained karnas friendship, . c, hatasya narakasyaatmaa kmurtim upaashritaindra will take away his ear rings and coat of mail, aavishtacittaatmaa narakasyaantaraatmanaavaikartana, possessed by naraka, k. was desirous of slaying arjunapromised to slay arjunakarnadigvijayasutaputrasyak. subdued the earth for duryodhanaduryodhanayajnaadvised duryodhana to perform the raajasuya, swears that he will slay arjunaghoshayaatraap.sutaputrenadraupadiharanap.kundalaaharanap.surya appeared to k. in a dream and dissuaded him from giving away his ear rings and coat of mail when k. refused to break his vow, surya advised him to ask indra for the dart amoghaacf. kundalaaaranap.i.e. kunti, atharvashirasi shrutam, page3 b, shukle dashottare pakshe, the husband of raadhaaonly afterwards he was named k vaasavi, suryasambhavaaaraneyap.kicakavadhap.goharanap.recommended to inquire about the paandavasvaikartanasya, recommended to undertake the expedition for ravishing the cattle of viraatavaikartanampromised to slay arjunasutaputra, in the van of duryodhanas arrayvaikartanamis defeated by arjunavaikartana, on the top of his standard there was the device of an elephants rope, naagakakshaaarjuna rushed towards k.is defeated by arjunastupefied by arjuna, who caused uttara to bring k.s yellow robes awaypadam padasahasrena yash caran naaparaa dhnuyaatyudhishthirasainyodyogap shalya promises yudhishthira to weaken the energy of k when he becomes his charioteer in the encounter between k. and arjunasanjayayaanap . อด, อด, . vaivasvata, q.v. vasushena, the original name of karna, . vrisha, .
karna2, son of dhritaraashtra .
karnashravas, a brahman . . . when duryodhana had come to haastinapura, bhishma said to him that, as he had told him before, this journey did not please him, and advised him to make peace with the paandavas. duryodhana laughed and sallied out with shakuni, followed by karna and dushaasana. when bhishma, ashamed, had gone away, they returned and began to consult. karna complained of the partiality of bhishma for the paandavas, and promised to conquer the world for duryodhana. duryodhana gladly accepted his offer, and on an auspicious lunar etc karna set out . karna, surrounded by a large army, first made drupada and the princes that were under him pay tribute. he then successively conquered the north, the east, the south, and the west, with the mlecchas, the mountaineers, bhadras, rohitakas, aagneyas, maalavas, shashakas, nagnajit, etc. having returned to haastinapura, he was highly praised by duryodhana and dhritaraashtra, who sat with gaandhaari .
karnanirvaaka, a muni .
karnaparvan . the night after dronas death, and the sixteenth morning, and brief account of the sixteenth and seven teenth days. after dronas death the kuru warriors in grief, with duryodhana at their head, repaired to ashvatthaaman. when night came they proceeded to their tents, but could not sleep they passed that night together in duryodhanas tent, reflecting . when morning came they rose and performed their customary rites. arranging their troops they proceeded to battle, making karna their leader. the paandavas also proceeded to battle. karna fought for two days and was then slain by arjuna. sanjaya repaired to haastinapura and informed dhritaraashtra of karnas fall. janamejaya inquired about dhritaraashtra and the details of the battle . vaishampaayana said after the fall of karna, sanjaya set out that night for haastinapura and spoke with dhritaraashtra . sanjaya related the dis couragement of the kuru army after the fall of drona duryo dhanas spirited address karna was made generalissimo but slain by arjuna on the second day . hearing of karnas fall in battle, dhritaraashtra swooned away he and the ladies were restored to their senses dhritaraashtra inquired whether duryodhana was still alive sanjaya informed him of dushaasanas slaughter . requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya recounted the names of those that had fallen and those that were still alive dhritaraashtra once more swooned away . dhritaraashtras lament for karna sanjaya endeavoured to comfort him continuation of dhritaraashtras lament . . the sixteenth day after dronas fall the kauravas, having fled and been rallied by duryodhana, fought for a long time with the paandavas . on the approach of the evening twilight the kauravas retired to their encampment they held a consultation in the night duryodhana inquired of his counsellors as to what should next be e. ashvatthaaman suggested the installation of karna as generalissimo . duryodhana offered karna the command, which karna accepted, promising to slay the paandavas . karna was installed in the command and blessed by the brahmans, and ordered the troops to be arrayed at the rise of the sun . beholding karna, none recked the loss of bhishma or drona, etc. he formed a makara array the tip, the two eyes, the head, the neck, the middle, the left foot, the right foot, the left hind foot, the right hind foot, the tail . yudhishthira asked arjuna to array the paandava army and slay karna . the paandava troops were arrayed in the shape of the half moon the left side, the right side, the middle, the rear yudhaamanyu and uttamaujas became the protectors of arjunas chariot wheels, and did not quit him for a moment. then commenced the battle . a fierce slaughter on both sides . dhrishtadyumna, etc headed by bhimasena kshemadhurti, who was slain by bhimasena. the kurus fled away . nakula karna bhimasena ashvatthaaman saatyaki the kaikaya princes vinda and anuvinda king citrasena shrutakarman prativindhya citra duryodhana yudhishthira arjuna the samshaptakas dhrishtadyumna kripa shikhandin kritavarman shruta kirti shalya sahadeva dushaasana. anuvinda was slain by saatyaki, and so was vinda saatyaki got upon the chariot of yudhaamanyu, then upon another chariot the kaikeyas fled . shrutakarman the abhisaara king citrasena, whom he slew and then he pursued his flying troops. prativindhya citra, whom he slew. the kurus fled only ashvatthaaman bhimasena si caa and m. ri applauded them both were borne away insensible by their drivers . arjuna the samshaptakas si . ri and caa. applauded him, etc. ashvatthaaman arjuna, who fought also the samshaptakas the kalinga, vanga, and nishaada heroes attacked arjuna with a division of elephants, which was broken krishna urged arjuna not to spare ashvatthaaman, who at last was borne away by his steeds and entered the army of karna krishna and arjuna proceeded towards the samshaptakas . the magadha chief dandadhaara massacred the paandava army. arjuna dandadhaara, whom he slew his brother danda arjuna, who slew him the hostile force broke up arjuna proceeded once more against the samshaptakas, whom he slaughtered ugraayudhas son arjuna, who slew him urged by krishna, arjuna smote the remnant of the samshaptakas, hastening in order to kill karna krishna described the dismal sights of the field of battle for the sake of duryodhana alone. the army of duryodhana was defeated by paandya, who regarded himself as superior to bhishma, etc and was slaughtering the army of karna, the pulindas, etc. ashvatthaaman paandya, who employed the vaayavya weapon mean while karna began to rout the elephant force of the paandavas paandya ascended a riderless elephant and split ashvatthaamans diadem then ashvatthaaman slew him, who had given numerous steeds, men, and elephants as food to the raa. duryodhana and his brothers worshipped karna . krishna said to arjuna that he did not see yudhishthira the paandavas had retreated, and karna was slaying the srinjayas. the kurus the paandavas karna caused a great carnage among the paandavas, srinjayas, and paancaalas. the paancaala chief, etc karna dhrishtadyumna the angas, etc. the paandavas and the paancaalas come to the aid of dhrishtadyumna nakula, etc overloaded the elephants with their weapons saatyaki killed the elephant of the vanga king and felled the rider sahadeva pundra, whose elephant he slew, and then proceeded towards the anga chief nakula the anga king, whom he slew the elephant men of the angas mekalas, etc nakula then the paandavas, etc rushed to the rescue of nakula sahadeva slew eight elephants and nakula many dhrishtadyumna, etc overloaded the elephants with arrows the hostile army fled away and the paandava warriors rushed against karna . sahadeva dushaasana, who was taken away by his charioteer sahadeva crushed duryodhanas division . karna nakula both the somakas and kurus were greatly afflicted nakula fled on foot karna pursued him and placed his stringed bow around his neck, but let him escape, recollecting the words of kunti nakula in great shame proceeded towards yudhishthiras chariot, which he ascended. karna at noon made a great slaughter among the paanshaalas and the srinjayas, and pursued them . uluka yuyutsu, who was vanquished and mounted another chariot. uluka slaughtered the paancaalas and the srinjayas. shruta karman shataanika both were deprived of their chariots and retired shrutakarman mounted the chariot of vivimsha, shataanika that of prativindhya. shakuni sutasoma, who was deprived of his chariot, but contended on foot with shakuni, who fought from his chariot the si etc were highly pleased sutasoma went to the chariot of shrutakirti shakuni slew many of the paandava army . kripa dhrishtadyumna, who got bewildered and let his charioteer carry him to bhimasena, pursued by kripa. kritavarman shikhandin, who fell into a swoon, and was borne away by his charioteer the paandava army fled . arjuna the trigartas, etc. arjuna slew king shatrun jaya, and sushrutas son, and candradeva king satyasena wounded krishna and was slain by arjuna, who then slew citravarman and the samshaptakas in hundreds and thousands, and mitrasena, and wounded susharman all the samshaptakas attacked arjuna, who invoked the aindra weapon the hostile army fled away almost entirely . duryodhana yudhishthira, who deprived him of his chariot karna, etc rushed to his aid the other sons of paandu surrounded yudhishthira the paancaalas the kauravas karna slaughtered the paancaalas, arjuna the trigartas, bhimasena the kurus and their elephant division, when the sun had passed the meridian duryo dhana yudhishthira duryodhana swooned away bhimasena prevented yudhishthira from slaying duryodhana kritavarman bhimasena in the after noon . the kurus the paandava army karna saatyaki many kurus came to rescue karna, but fled away before the paandavas, who were headed by the sons of drupada arjuna and krishna destroyed the kurus duryodhana arjuna arjuna ashvatthaaman kripa, etc. saatyaki, etc karna, who vanquished them arjuna karna many kurus fled away. at the close of the day both armies withdrew raa. and psh etc appeared . dhritaraashtra exalted the prowess of arjuna . the kurus, in grief, took counsel of one another karna assured duryodhana that he would slay arjuna on the morrow. on the morrow they beheld an invincible array formed by yudhishthira according to the rules of brihaspati and ushanas. duryodhana and his troops put confidence in karna. dhritaraashtras grief sanjaya rebuked him by reminding him of his evil acts . at dawn karna repeated before duryodhana his pledge to slaughter arjuna my bow vijaya is the foremost of all weapons...arjuna is superior to me only by having krishna for his charioteer, the chariot given him by agni, his steed, and his standard with the ape. he desired to have shalya to drive his chariot duryodhana solicited shalya to comply with karnas wishes shalya took offence at the proposal duryodhana repeated his request in honorific words, and shalya accepted on the condition that he might in karnas presence, utter whatever he desired . duryodhana related to shalya tripuraakhyaana, which the great ri. maarkandeya had narrated to his father. as brahmaan, ...the supreme deity acted as the driver of rudra, so thou restrain the steeds of karna . he then related a story of parashu raama, which a virtuous brahman had recited in the presence of his father. raama gave the dhanurveda to karna, whom not think to have been born in the suta order, but to be the son of a god, born in the kshatriya order and abaned in infancy . duryodhana said so did brahman act as rudras driver the driver should be superior to the warrior thou art selected by us as superior to karna. shalya said that many a time he had heard this history recited to him, and krishna, knowing the same, had become the charioteer of arjuna, and would fight if arjuna were slain. duryodhana eulogized karna and then shalya as superior to krishna. shalya repeated his promise and condition. duryodhana embraced karna, and, requested by him, once more obtained the promise of shalya, who embraced duryodhana and asked their forgiveness for the words he might speak to karna for his good what shall say, in order to inspire thee confidence, is fraught with self adulation am a driver like maatali himself . duryodhana said to karna shalya, who is superior to krishna, will act as a driver, like maatali to indra. when the morning came, duryodhana again successfully asked shalya to become karnas charioteer. karna having worshipped the chariot, they both ascended it. duryodhana once more addressed karna . karna told shalya to urge the steeds that he might slay arjuna, etc. shalya endeavoured to inspire karna with fear by eulogizing the paandavas . when karna set out there appeared ill omens. the kuru army, however, was filled with joy. karna reflected and boasted . shalya ridiculed him and praised arjuna . karna proceeded on his chariot with white steeds and tiger skins, slaying large numbers in battle along his way, and inquired after arjuna, promising every paandava soldier that he met that unto him who pointed out arjuna to him he would give whatever wealth he desired. duryodhana and the troops rejoiced shalya scornfully laughed, and said that karna would get to see arjuna without the trouble of seeking him, and asked him to aban his desire for a single combat with arjuna. karna repeated his resolution, and shalya insulted him in a long speech . karna replied angrily, describing the dis reputable practices of the madrakas . shalya answered by praising himself and his accomplishments as a charioteer, and by reciting the story of the crow and the swan even as that crow, fed upon the remains of the dinners of the vaishya children, disregarded his equals and superiors, so t thou, that art fed by the sons of dhritaraashtra upon the remains of their dishes, disregard all, etc. . karna said that krishna and arjuna were well known to him, but did not make him afraid. the curse, however, of raama pained him greatly. he dwelt, disguised as a brahman, with raama in former days, desirous of obtaining celestial weapons from him. indra, as a worm, began to pierce his thigh, on which was lying the head of the sleeping raama therefore he did not move. but raama, witnessing his patience, discovered that he was not a brahman, and cursed him, saying that this weapon would never, in the time of need, when the hour of his death came, occur to his memory. he had forgotten the weapon, but would, notwithstanding, slay arjuna he suspected shalya of secret friendship with the paandavas he would employ the braahma weapon, which arjuna would never be able to escape, if only the wheels of karnas chariot did not sink into the earth that day he would not take fright at yama himself with his rod, or varuna with his noose, or kubera with his mace, or indra with the thunderbolt. once upon a time, while wandering for the sake of practising with my bow vijaya, had heedlessly struck the calf of a brahmans homa cow the brahman cursed me, saying that my wheel would sink into the earth in a battle when was in great danger. the kings of the lunar race offered to give that brahman, kine and bulls, but in vain, etc. . karna said that it was in vain that shalya tried to frighten him . karna said that in dhritaraashtras abode the brahmans used to give accounts of various delightful regions and many kings of ancient times an old brahman had said, blaming the madrakas and the baahikas, that they should be avoided as being out of the pale of virtue and living away from himavat, etc but between sindhu and its tributary rivers. on some very secret mission karna had to live among the baahikas, and therefore their conduct was well known to him there is a town shaakala, a river aapagaa, and a baahika clan jarttikas the practices of these people are very censurable . p and brahmans never accept gifts from those that are fallen, or those that are begotten by shudras on the girls of other castes, or the baahikas, who never perform sacrifices and are exceedingly irreligious. he mentioned three impure places . there were two pishaacas in the river vipaashaa, named bahi and hika the baahikas are the offspring of those two psh. they are not creatures created by the creator. the kaarashkaras, etc and other peoples of no religion one should always avoid even thus did a riaa. woman speak to a brahman who went to that country for bathing in sacred water and passed a single night there. the regions are called aarattaa, the water baahika the lowest brahmans have resided there from very remote times, without the vedas, etc. the prasthalas, etc are almost as blameable in their practices . karna continued his description of the baahikas . the aarattas had been cursed by a chaste woman. the kauravas, etc know what the eternal religion is. brahmaan, even in the krita age, had censured the practices of the country of the five rivers. k. quoted a saying of the raa. kalmaashapaada, declared by the raakshasa to be the formula for curing a person possessed by a raa. or killed by poison. remarks on the paancaalas, etc on agni, etc. . shalya spoke in dis paragement of the angas . duryodhana restored peace between karna and shalya . the seven teenth days battle. beholding the array of the paarthas made by dhrishtadyumna, karna proceeded to battle and assailed yudhishthira. dhritaraashtra inquired about the disposition of the kuru forces . sanjaya described the kaurava array right wing on the right of these the left side on their left in the centre at the head karna with his sons in the rear dushaasana and behind him duryodhana and his brothers, protected by the united madrakas and kekayas ashvatthaaman, etc with mlecchas on elephants followed behind. the array was formed according to the plan of brihaspati. yudhishthira, beholding karna, spoke to arjuna of the hostile array arjuna should proceed against karna bhimasena against duryodhana nakula against vrishasena sahadeva against shakuni shataanika against dushaasana saatyaki against kritavarman paandya against ashvatthaaman yudhishthira against kripa the draupadeyas with shikhandin against the rest of the dhaartaraashtras, etc. shalya pointed out to karna the chariot of arjuna and various omens, etc. how the samshaptakas threatened to slay arjuna and the other heroes of the paandava army, and he dissuaded him from trying to slay arjuna. meanwhile the two armies mingled fiercely in battle . dhritaraashtra asked sanjaya about arjuna, the sam shaptakas, and karna. sanjaya related arjuna arrayed his troops, headed by dhrishtadyumna by the side of dhrishtadyumna the draupadeyas. arjuna the samshaptakas. the paancaalas, etc the kurus kripa, etc the koshalas, etc. the battle became conducive to fame, heaven, and virtue for the kshatriya, vaishya, and shudra heroes that engaged in it. duryodhana, etc. karna the paandavas, etc. karna harassed yudhishthira fierce battle between the kurus and the srinjayas . dhritaraashtra inquired about the particulars of karnas encounter with yudhishthira. sanjaya related karna attacked the paancaalas and made a great slaughter among others he slew the five paancaalas bhaanudeva, etc. . the protectors of karnas chariot wheels were his sons sushena and satyasena, and his eldest son vrishasena protected his rear. dhrishtadyumna, etc karna karnas sons sushena bhimasena, who pierced him with seventy arrows and then slew karnas son bhaanusena bhimasena kripa, etc. bhimasena sushena karna sushena nakula saha deva saatyaki vrishasena, who was taken up by dushaasana on the latters chariot, borne away, and caused to ride in another chariot vrishasena the draupadeyas, etc. yuyudhaana dushaasana, whom he deprived of his chariot, etc but who got another chariot and fought from within the division of karna karna dhrishtadyumna, etc. at last karnas assailants gave way karna yudhishthira the cedis, etc. the draavidas, etc karna, who crushed them karna yudhishthira, etc. yudhishthira addressed karna in rage karna swooned away, but recovered and slew yudhishthiras wheel protectors, the paancaala princes candradeva and dandadhaara yudhishthira struck sushena and satyasena, etc. saatyaki, etc karna, who invoked the braahma weapon karna deprived yudhishthira of his chariot yudhishthira fled, riding in another chariot with the white steeds with black hair on their tails that used to bear him, pursued by karna, who touched him with his hand, but remembered the words of kunti and was withheld by shalya, but insulted yudhishthira and let him escape. the cedis, etc followed yudhishthira karna made a great slaughter of the paandava forces yudhishthira urged his forces to proceed against karna, which they did, headed by bhimasena the kurus broke and fled away . duryodhana in vain tried to stop the flying troops. then shakuni, etc. karna bhimasena, who let saatyaki and dhrishtadyumna protect yudhishthira shalya pointed out bhima to karna karna replied karna swooned and was brought away by shalya . requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related urged by duryodhana, several kuru leaders assailed bhima, who slew, among others, six sons of dhritaraashtra . the other sons of dhritaraashtra fled away. karna bhimasena, whom he deprived of his chariot, but who then with his mace killed elephants and men by hundreds, among others fifty two elephants belonging to shakuni next, horsemen dispatched by shakuni, then he mounted another chariot and proceeded against karna. karna yudhishthira, whom he pursued as he was flying away bhimasena karna saatyaki karna. beholding shakuni, etc the kurus rallied when the sun had reached the meridian. fierce battle . arjuna the samshaptakas, etc. arjuna susharman arjuna repeatedly invoked the naaga weapon, paralysing the legs of the samshaptakas susharman invoked the sauparna weapon birds came n and devoured the snakes arjuna sat n, recovered, and invoked the aindra weapon the battle became awful . kritavarman, etc began a fierce battle kripa shikhandin shikhandin was deprived of his chariot and made inactive drshtadyumna proceeded against kripa kritavarman dhrishtadyumna ashvatthaaman yudhi shthira duryo dhana nakula and sahadeva karna bhimasena, etc. kripa shikhandin suketu kripa shikhandin retreated kripa slew suketu, whose troops fled away kritavarman dhrishtadyumna, who made him driverless and was assailed by the kurus . ashva tthaaman yudhishthira, etc. prativindhya, etc ashvatthaaman saatyaki had his driver slain yudhishthira went away, leaving his division, against the kurus ashvatthaaman also left the spot . karna bhimasena, etc who, avoiding karna, proceeded against the kurus arjuna the samshaptakas bhimasena the kauravas karna the paancaalas duryodhana nakula and sahadeva dhrishtadyumna duryodhana, who was rescued by his brothers and borne away by dandadhaara upon the latters chariot. karna dhrishtadyumna saatyaki the paancaalas a fierce battle between the two armies when the sun had ascended the meridian karna vyaaghraketu, etc. . yudhishthira, etc karna. bhimasena slew the kurus baahlikas, etc. . arjuna addressed krishna upon beholding karnas prowess, and seeing that the samshaptakas were broken. arjuna broke through the kuru host. duryodhana once more urged the samshaptakas against him. having slain, kshatriyas, arjuna came to the further wing of the samshaptakas, which was protected by the kaambojas the younger brother of the kaamboja chief sudakshina was killed by arjuna the kaambojas, etc were slain. ashvatthaaman arjuna si. and caa. came krishna urged arjuna not to spare ashva tthaaman, who swooned and was carried away by his driver arjuna slew the kuru troops. arjuna had routed the samshaptakas, bhimasena the kurus, karna the paancaalas. yudhishthira, pained by his wounds, had retreated a krosha . duryodhana addressed the kuru leaders . ashvatthaaman swore to slay dhrishtadyumna or not to f his armour . a fierce battle commenced. aps etc came aps. rained flowers, etc on the combatants . arjuna pointed out to krishna that the paandava army was flying away, karna slaying their warriors, and yudhishthira nowhere to be seen the third part of the day still remains. arjuna proceeded to yudhishthira krishna described the field of battle to arjuna . a terrible battle commenced . the kurus the srinjayas a remnant only of the samshaptakas were left alive. dhrishtadyumna the paandavas karna saatyaki karna ashvatthaaman dhrishta dyumna karna the paancaalas, etc. dhrishtadyumna was worsted by ashvatthaaman and rescued by arjuna arjuna ashvatthaaman dhrishtadyumna was brought away by sahadeva on the latters chariot ashva tthaaman swooned on his chariot and was carried away by his driver. arjuna proceeded to wards the samshaptakas . krishna pointed out to arjuna that yudhishthira was being pursued by many dhaartaraashtras, headed by duryodhana, while the paancaalas were following in order to rescue him, and that he was in great danger, though the kurus had been checked by saatyaki and bhima, because duryodhana, etc would break n the very mountains yudhi shthira is exceedingly emaciated in consequence of his fastings he is endued with braahma force, but not with much of kshatriya might he was surrounded by the dhaartaraashtra warriors with the weapons sthunaakarna, etc. in the very sight of the twins, etc karna was destroying the paandava division, and rushing against bhimasena having vanquished the paancaalas, etc he would soon come against arjuna, and he was protected by duryodhana he should be slain karna was rushing against dhrishtadyumna in order to exterminate the paanshaalas however, yudhishthira was living bhima and the paancaalas were now conquering the kauravas, who were flying away, kripa and karna, etc resisting the paancaalas the nishaada prince was slain by bhima, who had checked three akshauhinis of duryodhanas soldiers. arjuna then destroyed the remnant of his foes the samshaptakas fled . requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related karna, etc bhimasena the paandavas, etc. shikhandin karna dhrishta dyumna dushaasana nakula vrishasena yudhishthira citrasena sahadeva uluka saatyaki shakuni the draupadeyas the other kauravas ashvatthaaman arjuna kripa yudhaamanyu kritavarman uttamaujas shikhandin was deprived of his chariot by karna and retreated dhrishtadyumna dushaa sana si. and aps etc wondered. karna endeavours to rally the retreating troops of the dhaartaraashtras. after karna had gone away, nakula proceeded against the kauravas karnas son, avoiding nakula, went to karna in order to protect his chariot wheel. uluka was made driverless by sahadeva and entered the division of the trigartas. shakuni ascended the chariot of uluka, who took him away from saatyaki, who then routed the kuru army. duryodhana bhimasena, who deprived him of his chariot and bow and made him fly away the whole kuru army attacked bhimasena, who scattered them. yudhaamanyu retreated on his chariot, driving it himself. uttamaujas sat n and was taken away by his driver. the whole kuru army attacked bhimasena dushaasana and shakuni bhimasena, who made duryodhana fly away, invoked his celestial weapons, and scattered and destroyed them . arjuna appeared. duryodhana yudhishthira, whose warriors then came to rescue him with an akshauhini karna checked them all sahadeva duryodhana karna began an onslaught on the troops of yudhishthira and dhrishtadyumna they fled away karna yudhishthira, who sat n and ordered his driver to retreat duryodhana and the dhaarta raashtras pursued him but, kekaya troops and a body of paancaala troops checked them. duryodhana bhima . karna the kaikayas, who fled to bhimasena. karna yudhishthira nakula and sahadeva karna, who slew the steeds both of yudhishthira and nakula, who both ascended the chariot of sahadeva shalya, in order to rescue them, exhorted karna to fight with arjuna, but in vain yudhishthira turned from the battle shalya once more reminded karna of arjuna, etc and that duryodhana was in danger from bhimasena. karna then left yudhishthira and the twins and rushed to the rescue of duryodhana. yudhishthira in shame retreated with the steeds of sahadeva, with the twins, whom he then dispatched to bhima . ashvatthaaman arjuna ashvatthaaman employed the aindra weapon, which arjuna baffled with a powerful weapon created by indra ashvatthaaman, having had his driver slain, himself guided his steeds while he fought with arjuna then he was brought away by his steeds. the paandavas, repeatedly charging the kauravas, broke their ranks and caused them to fly away in the very sight of dhritaraashtras sons, etc. . duryodhana caused karna to rally the troops karna, employing the bhaargava weapon, harassed the paancaalas, who, with the cedis, began to lose their senses. the srinjayas called upon arjuna and vaasudeva. arjuna spoke to krishna about karna krishna reminded him first to seek yudhishthira . arjuna met with bhima and asked him to bring intelligence of yudhishthira bhima feared to incur the reproach of cowardice by leaving the battle arjuna went to yudhishthira in the paandava camp upon bhima agreeing to resist the sam shaptakas. arjuna and krishna found yudhishthira lying on his bed thinking that karna had been slain, yudhishthira congratulated them . arjuna told yudhishthira the real motive of his arrival in camp, and swore to slay karna and all the foes that very day . yudhishthira censured arjuna, thinking that he had run away from the battle, leaving bhima unsupported, several times invoking him to give up gaandiva to somebody else . arjuna drew his sword in order to strike off yudhishthiras head in fulfilment of his vow about the person who would tell him to give up gaandiva krishna addressed arjuna on the nature of truth, relating the story of balaaka and of kaushika arjuna said he must keep his vow krishna suggested that arjuna by insulting yudhishthira, by addressing him as thou, would be regarded as having slain him . urged by krishna, arjuna insulted yudhishthira in a long speech then he became despondent and desired to strike off his own head krishna urged him to utter his own praises, as self praise is equal to self destruction. arjuna praised himself, and begged for yudhishthiras forgiveness, promising to slay karna and rescue bhima. yudhishthira grieved, saying that bhimasena, not he, ought to be king. krishna comforted yudhishthira and induced him to forgive both himself and arjuna . speeches of krishna, arjuna, and yudhishthira on the same topic . arjuna proceeded to slay karna, having obtained yudhishthiras leave commanded by krishna, daaruka had equipped the chariot. auspicious omens. krishna addressed arjuna in order to raise his spirits continuation . arjunas cheerful reply to krishna . requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related description of the battle arjuna slew many. kripa shikhandin saatyaki duryodhana shrutashravas ashva tthaaman yudhaamanyu citrasena the srinjaya uttamaujas karnas son sushena sahadeva the gaandhaara king shakuni nakulas son shataanika karnas son vrishasena nakula kritavarman the paancaala king dhrishtadyumna karna dushaasana bhima. uttamaujas slew sushena. karna uttamaujas, who had his steeds slain, slew the steeds of kripa, etc and ascended the chariot of shikhandin. shikhandin did not wish to strike kripa while the latter had no chariot ashvatthaaman rescued kripa. bhima scorched the kuru troops with his arrows . the bharata host fled before bhima, who said to his charioteer vishoka that he was anxious about arjuna and yudhishthira requested by bhima, vishoka took an estimate of his weapons. bhima once more addressed vishoka, saying that he would that day slay all the kurus or himself succumb, etc. . vishoka pointed out to bhima that arjuna was returning to battle . bhima promised to give vishoka fourteen villages, female slaves, and twenty chariots for this agreeable intelligence . arjuna and bhima attacked the kaurava army with great vigour . duryodhana told his troops to slay bhima, who made a formidable carnage among them . shakuni his brothers bhima shakuni was brought away by duryodhana, who retreated the troops fled away to karna . requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related in the afternoon karna assailed the somakas, and bhima the dhaartaraashtra troops. karna assailed the paancaalas, etc. the paandavas encompassed him on all sides shikhandin, etc karna, who vanquished them. cedis and matsyas karna, who checked them si and caa. were gratified the paandava troops fled, and were attacked by the dhaartaraashtra archers. duryodhana rejoiced duryodhana, etc slew the paandava warriors similarly the paandava heroes dhrishta dyumna, etc made an onslaught on the kurus . arjuna produced a river of blood . requested by arjuna, krishna took him to karna, whom shalya informed, and who answered shalya . requested by karna, duryodhana, etc in order to open up a path for karna to arjuna, speedily proceeded and attacked arjuna, who caused a great onslaught ashvatthaaman kripa and kritavarman arjuna, who vanquished them. shikhandin, etc proceeding towards arjuna, checked the foes the kurus and srinjayas slew one another . arjuna proceeded to the rescue of bhima and slew the assailants of bhima the kurus fled arjuna informed bhima that yudhishthira was well, and then proceeded he was surrounded by ten sons of dhritaraashtra, whom he slew . arjuna was assailed by ninety samshaptakas as he was proceeding towards karnas chariot he slew them. many kauravas attacked him, whom he destroyed. then he was attacked by a force of mlecchas, riding, elephants, commanded by duryodhana. arjuna made a heavy onslaught. abaning the small remnant of kauravas, bhimasena rushed towards arjuna and also destroyed this remnant then he followed arjuna in his rear karna was deserted by his troops the sons of dhritaraashtra repaired to karna. karna attacked the paancaalas karna felled janamejayas driver and steeds, and cut off the bows of shataanika and sutasoma karna dhrishtadyumna, etc. ugrakarman karnas son prasena karna slew ugrakarman prasena saatyaki, who slew him karna saatyaki shikhandin karna slew dhrishtadyumnas son and attacked sutasoma. krishna urged arjuna to slay karna arjuna proceeded with bhimasena uttamaujas, etc karna, who vanquished them they were rescued by the draupadeyas saatyaki duryo dhana kripa, etc. dushaasana bhima . bhima slew dushaasana and drank his blood in the very sight of duryodhana and karna the bystanders, with karnas brother citrasena, fled away, thinking bhima to be a raa. yudhaamanyu, etc pursued citrasena citrasena was slain by him karna nakula bhimasena took up a little of dushaasanas blood and drank it, addressing krishna and arjuna and vowing soon to slay duryodhana . ten of dhritaraashtras sons bhima, who slew them. karna was afraid, but was encouraged by shalya . karnas son vrishasena bhima nakula, who had his white steeds of the vanaayu breed slain by him, and sprang upon bhimas chariot in the sight of arjuna urged by bhima and nakula, arjuna proceeded towards vrishasena . eleven warriors the kulindas kritavarman, etc. the kulinda prince kripa, who slew him the younger brother of the kulinda prince kripa the gaandhaara king, who slew the kulinda the kurus the paandus srinjayas the bhoja chief kritavarman shataanika ashvatthaaman slew three elephants the third brother of the kulinda chief duryodhana the kulinda, mounting another elephant, kraatha, who was slain vrika the same kulinda, whose elephant crushed him the son of babhru the same elephant sahadevas son babhru fell n the same kulinda shakuni, who slew him nakulas son shataanika a kulinda warrior, who was slain by him karnas son vrishasena shataanika arjuna, etc. arjuna, informing karna and all the other kurus headed by duryodhana and ashvatthaaman that he would slay vrishasena and then karna, as bhima would slay duryodhana, slew vrishasena karna arjuna krishna addressed arjuna arjunas reply description of arjuna and karna all the inhabitants of the world were heard to differ amongst themselves daa g psh the snakes, raa. as yaatudhaanas, gh etc sided with karna the vedas, etc with arjuna the smaller snakes all sided with karna m saa r . a agni, etc sided with arjuna, while all aa. sided with karna the vaishyas, etc sided with karna p etc with arjuna the pretas, psh raa etc with karna . ri b. ri r. ri. with arjuna, as also g. headed by tumburu. with the praadheyas and mauneyas, g. and aps and many wise sages, having for their vehicles wolves, etc came in order to witness the encounter that was also witnessed by daa g n y etc m. ri p etc and brahmaan with b. ri. and prajaapatis and bhava. indra wished that arjuna should vanquish karna surya that karna should vanquish arjuna. the gods urged brahmaan that the success of both should be equal, indra that arjuna and krishna should win brahmaan and ishaana said that the victory of arjuna was certain let karna obtain identity with . or m. let him with drona and bhishma be worshipped in heaven. indra acquiesced in their words. description of karnas and arjunas chariots. the ape on arjunas banner attacked the elephants rope on karnas banner. krishna and shalya cast keen glances at each other, and so did arjuna and karna. karna asked shalya what he would if he was slain shalya said that then he would slay both krishna and arjuna similarly asked by arjuna, krishna said that karna could not slay arjuna if so, the destruction of the universe would be at hand, and he would himself slay karna and shalya. arjuna said that that very day the wives of karna would become wis . in the welkin n as si y g raa aps b. ri etc looked on. the battle commenced. duryodhana, etc arjuna arjuna defeated all of them floral showers fell, etc. ashvatthaaman told duryodhana to make peace, but in vain duryo dhana urged his troops description of the battle between arjuna and karna arjuna employed an aagneya weapon, which was quenched by karna with a vaaruna weapon by means of clouds, which arjuna dispelled by a vaayavya weapon arjuna employed the aindra weapon, karna the bhaargava weapon. the paancaalas and somakas karna, who slew them. seeing arjunas weapons baffled by karna, bhima urged arjuna to put forth his strength, and so did krishna . arjuna bowed to brahmaan and invoked the braahma weapon, which could be applied by the wind alone karna baffled it urged by bhima, arjuna applied a second braahma weapon, which caused a great carnage among the kaurava troops . karna bhimasena, etc. . arjuna shot at karna and shalya, and slew sabhaapati, etc. the kauravas urged karna to slay arjuna. yudhishthira appeared in order to witness the encounter. arjunas bow string broke karna took advantage of the interval to hit arjuna, etc. . karna employed as arrows five snakes that had sided with takshakas son they penetrated krishnas body, entered the earth, and, having bathed, returned to karna, but were cut off by arjuna, who then covered karnas chariot with showers of arrows and slew, kurus, who had been urged by duryodhana to fight. the kurus fled, leaving karna to fight singly with arjuna . karna baffled arjunas weapon karna and arjuna shot at each other dense showers of arrows. the snake ashvasena, who was hostile to arjuna, was passing his time in the nether region, having escaped from the conflagration at khaandava recollecting the death of his mother he now soared up and entered into karnas quiver in the shape of an arrow. karna and arjuna were fanned and sprinkled with fragrant sandal water by many aps. staying in the welkin, and shakra and surya with their hands gently brushed their faces. karna aimed that arrow, born in airaavatas race, which he had long kept for arjunas destruction, and which lay singly in a golden quiver amid sandal dust omens appeared, and the lokapaalas with shakra raised loud wails. karna did not know that the snake ashvasena had entered his arrow by the aid of his yoga powers. shalya in vain exhorted karna to take another arrow karna said karna never aims an arrow twice persons like us never become crooked warriors. krishna with his feet pressed arjunas chariot about a cubit into the earth, and the snake arrow, failing to strike off arjunas head, broke his diadem, incapable of being crushed by rudra, etc. . celestial flowers were showered upon krishna, etc. ashvasena appeared to karna and asked him to shoot the same weapon again karna refused to avail himself of anothers help or shoot the same shaft twice. ashvasena then, of his own accord, rushed on arjuna in the shape of an arrow krishna informed arjuna that it was ashvasena, who, as an unborn child, was saved with his mother at khaandava. arjuna cut the snake into pieces, and krshna with his arms raised the chariot from the earth. once, when karna was stupefied and stood inactive, arjuna was disinclined to slay him in such distress, but he was taught by krishna never to spare an enemy, however weak. at that time, when the hour of karnas death had come, kaala, approaching invisibly, in consequence of the brahmans wrath, said the earth is swallowing up thy wheel, and the weapon that raama had given him escaped from his memory, and the earth engulfed his left wheel. karna began to rail at righteousness as not always protecting its worshippers. karna invoked the braahma weapon, and arjuna the aindra weapon, which was baffled by karna urged by krishna to shoot high weapons, arjuna shot the braahma weapon. karna cut off, one after another, eleven bowstrings of arjunas, not knowing that arjuna had one hundred strings to his bow urged by krishna to strike karna with superior weapons, arjuna then consecrated another celestial weapon with mantras, uniting the raudra weapon with it. at that time the earth swallowed up one of karnas wheels. quickly alighting, karna seized his sunken wheel with his two arms and endeavoured to lift it up the earth rose up to the height of four fingers breadth, with her seven islands, etc. karna shed tears from wrath and asked arjuna to wait for a moment till he had lifted his sunken wheel . krishna taunted karna for appealing to virtue and the rules of fair fight by reminding him of all the wrongs e to the paandavas by himself. and duryodhana acting according to his counsels . karna dropped his head in shame and gave no answer, and continued to fight. krishna urged arjuna to pierce karna with a celestial weapon arjuna, remembering the incidents alluded to by krishna, blazed up with fury blazing flames of fire seemed to emanate from all the pores of his body, a sight that appeared exceedingly wonderful. both karna and arjuna invoked the braahma weapon, and karna once more made an effort to extricate his chariot. arjuna shot an agni weapon, quenched by karna with a vaaruna weapon, covering all the points of the compass with darkness, which arjuna dispelled with the vaayavya weapon. pierced by a shaft of karnas, while the earth trembled, etc arjuna began to reel, the gaandiva dropped from his hand, etc. at the interval karna fruitlessly endeavoured to extricate his chariot. recovering his senses, arjuna took up an anjalika weapon. urged by krishna to cut off the head of karna, arjuna cut off his standard, and then, with an anjalika weapon, struck off karnas head before karna could mount his chariot. a light issued from karnas body and entered the sun. the paandavas rejoiced . duryodhana, etc grieved bhima, uttering loud roars, frightened the kauravas, etc. . shalya informed duryodhana of karnas death . duryodhana became almost deprived of his senses . requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related the state of the kaurava army after karnas fall . duryodhana resolved to make a final stand . bhimasena and dhrishtadyumna duryodhana arjuna the chariot force of the kauravas nakula, etc shakuni the kurus fled away cekitaana, etc blew their conches. duryodhana challenged all the paandavas and fought with them with great valour he rallied the remnants of his troops and exhorted them to fight they fled away heedless of his words . shalya described to duryodhana the carnage on the field, and urged the withdrawal of the troops to their nightly quarters. having repeatedly comforted duryodhana, they retired headed by ashvatthaaman. karna did not lose his splenr. ri etc retired. the portents that were seen at karnas fall. arjuna and krishna blew their conches, at which the kauravas left the field, deserting shalya and duryodhana. g men, caa m. ri y and m. u. congratulated krishna and arjuna . enumeration of the kauravas retiring from the field . urged by krishna, who told dhrishtadyumna, etc to stand there with care, arjuna presented himself to yudhishthira, who, rising from his bed, greeted arjuna and krishna krishna congratulated yudhishthira, who ascribed his success to krishnas influence . yudhishthira, with krishna and arjuna, came back to the field to have a look at karnas body. the kings, filled with joy, approached yudhishthira and gladdened him greatly so nakula, etc. . dhritaraashtra and gaandhaari swooned away and were comforted by vidura, sanjaya, and the kuru ladies. the fruits of reciting the karnaparvan, as also of hearing it recited, . c, .
karnapraavarana, pl a people .
karnapraavaranaa, a maatri. u, .
kaarnaputra, dual. and pl. .
. karnas birth, etc. indras asking for his natural armour .
karnasuta, dual. .
karnaataka, pl a people .
karnaveshta, a prince .
karnikaa, an apsaras .
karotaka, a serpent .
karpata, v. pancakarpata.
kaarshna, adj. .
kaarshni1, a devagandharva .
kaartasvara, a daitya . b, .
kaartayuga, adj. . b, .
kartri, a vishvadeva .
kaarttika, name of a month . kaumuda.
. at the request of yudhishthira, maarkandeya enumerated the names of skanda . blessing to the reader. maarkandeya praised skanda . blessing to the reader, etc. .
kaarttiki, the day of full moon in the month of kaarttika . b, . kaumudi.
karusha, pl a people. d, . b, . . kaarusha, pl.
karusha2, an ancient king . kaarusha1.
kaarusha1, son of manu vaivasvata .
kaarusha3, the country of the karushas .
karushaadhipati . cf next.
kaarushaadhipati . the prec.
karushaka, adj. . next.
kaarushaka, adj. .
karvata, pl a people .
kaserumat, a yavana king. b, .
kaashthaa, pl. . u, .
katha, a rishi . c, .
kathaka, a warrior of skanda. u, .
katiraa, a maatri. u, .
kaubera, adj. . u, . x, . b, .
kauberya, adj. .
kaushala, v. kosala.
kaushala, pl v. kosala, pl.
kaushalya, kaushalya, pl kaushalyaa, kaushalyaa nandavardhana, kaushalyaanandivardhana, kaushalyaamatri, kaushalyaatmajaa, v. kaus.
kaushija, pl a people .
kaushika, various brahmans, descendants of kushika . g an ascetic k. lived near a village where many rivers met. he made a vow always to speak the truth, and became celebrated as a speaker of truth. from fear of robbers, certain persons entered that wood. the robbers came and asked k. by which path the men had gone, and he told them the truth the robbers finding out the persons slew them all. k. fell into a grievous hell, . b, .
kaushika7, the senaapati of jaraasandha .
kaushika8, v. kaushiki.
kaushika, adj. . b, .
kaushika, pl. .
kaushiki, a river . c, . b, . m, . b, . paaraa.
kaukulikaa, a maatri. u, .
kaukuttaka, pl a people .
kaumaara, adj. . u, .
kaumaara, name of a varsha in shaakadvipa. b, .
kaumodaki, name of the mace of krishna .
kaumudi, the day of full moon in the month of kaumuda .
kaunakutsya, a rishi .
kaunapa1, a serpent . do. pl. = raakshasa, pl .
kaunapaashana, a serpent .
kaundinya, a muni .
kaundivrisha, pl a people .
kaunkana, pl a people .
kaunteya, pl. and dual, .
kaurava, adj .
kaurava, pl .
kauravanandana, pl. = the sons of paandu, .
kauraveya, pl. = kaurava, pl .
kauraveya, adj .
kauravya, a serpent .
kauravya, pl. = kaurava, pl .
kausalyaa, wife of puru .
kausalyaa, wife of dasharatha and mother of raama .
kausalyaa, wife of janaka .
kaustubha, the jewel of krishna . kirita kaustubhadhara.
kautsa, a brahman .
kavacin, a son of dhritaraashtra .
kavasha, a rishi .
kaaverakaa, a river in shaakadvipa. b, .
kaaveri, a river .
kavi1, a rishi . b, . b, .
kavi3, a vishvadeva .
kavi4, a son of kavi1. b, .
kaavya1, a son of kavi1. b, . do. = shukra, q.v.
kaayashodhana, a tirtha .
kaayavya, name of a robber. b, .
b there was a robber kaayavya, born of a kshatriya father and a nishaada mother. k. was a practiser of kshatriya duties, conversant with the scriptures, free from cruelty, devoted to the brahmans, etc. morning and evening he went deer hunting he was well conversant with all the practices of the nishaadas, and of all animals living in the forest, etc. alone he could vanquish many hundreds of soldiers. he worshipped his old, blind, and deaf parents in the forest every etc. one day many thousands of robbers made him their leader, promising not to slay women, brahmans, etc. by abstaining from sin they obtained great prosperity. kaayavya, though a robber, still succeeded in winning felicity in heaven .
kesharin1, name of a monkey, v. kesarin.
kesharin2, a mountain in shaakadvipa. b, .
keshayantri, a maatri. u, .
keshin1, an asura .
keshini, an apsaras .
keshini, wife of ajamidha .
keshini, the maidservant of damayanti .
kedaara1, a mountain in shaakadvipa. b, .
kedaara kapilasya, v. kapilasya kedaara.
kedaara kapishthalasya, v. kapishthalasya kedaara.
kedaara matangasya, v. matanga.
kekaya, pl a people, especially five brothers, princes of the kekayas, who joined yudhishthira . b, . the numerous passages, where b. has kekaya instead of the reading of c. kaikaya or kaikeya .
kekayaraajaputra, v. kaikayaraajaputra.
keraka, pl a people .
kerala, pl a people .
kerala, sg. .
kesara, a mountain in shaakadvipa. b, .
kesarin, name of a monkey .
ketu1, name of a certain demon, originally the tail or body of raahu .
ketu, pl a kind of rishis .
ketushringa, an ancient king .
ketudharman, the younger brother of the trigarta king suryavarman .
ketumaala, a varsha .
ketumaalaa, a tirtha .
ketumat1, an asura .
ketumat2, various princes .
kevali, a city, .
khasha or khasa, pl a barbarous people .
khashira, pl a people .
khadga, a warrior of skanda. u, .
. nakula questioned bhishma as to which is really the foremost of weapons, and how the sword was first created and for what purpose, and who was the first instructor in the use of that weapon. bhishma related that in ancient times the universe was one vast expanse of water, enveloped in darkness, etc. there pitaamaha took his birth, he then created wind, fire, etc and then assuming a visible form he begot marici, etc. daksha . when sarvaloka pitaamaha had called into existence all creatures he promulgated the eternal religion laid n in the vedas. that religion was accepted by the gods with their preceptors and priests, and by aa r s m a bhrigu, atri, angiras, si the kaashyapas, vasishtha, etc. all of them lived in obedience to brahmaan. but the foremost of the daanavas, hiranyakashipu, etc and many other daityas and daanavas, filled with wrath and covetousness, took delight in all kinds of wicked acts, etc wielding only the rod of chastisement those foremost of asuras forsook every kindly intercourse with other creatures. then brahmaan with the brahmarshis proceeded to a delightful summit of himavat, and after, years he arranged a sacrifice. from the sacrificial fire arose asi, which brahmaan gave to rudra in order to enable him to put n irreligion. rudra with the sword destroyed and dispersed the asuras some of them penetrated into the bowels of the earth, others got under the cover of the mountains, some went upwards, others entered the depths of the sea. rudra then gave the sword to vishnu, vishnu to marici, marici to the maharshis, the maharshis to vaasava, mahendra to the lokapaalas, the lokapaalas to manu the son of surya. he gave it to his son kshupa. thence it passed successively to ikshvaaku, etc from drona to kripa, from kripa to thee and thy brothers. krittikaa is the nakshatra of the sword, agni its deity, rohini its gotra, rudra its high preceptor. its eight mysterious names are asi, etc. . of all weapons the sword is the foremost the puraanas truly declare that it was first wielded by maheshvara . prithu created the first bow. persons skilled in weapons should always worship the sword. blessing to the reader .
khaga1, a serpent .
khagama, a brahman .
khageshvara =, .
khalin, pl a gana of daanavas. l, .
khandakhandaa, a maatri. u, .
khaandava, name of a forest . . d, . b, . c, . e, อด, อด, . b, .
the of the minor parvans, in c including also mayadarshanaparvan, in all, . at the instance of dhritaraashtra and bhishma the paandavas at indraprastha began to bring other kings under their sway. all the subjects lived happily. once, in the summer, arjuna and krishna sported on the banks of the yamunaa with draupadi and subhadraa, etc. they were then approached by a brahman, whose complexion was like molten gold . it was agni. he asked them to help him to consume the forest of khaandava and the creatures therein for indra always prevented him from consuming it, because he was a friend of the naaga takshaka, who dwelt there with his followers and family a the antecedents of the khaandavad. b arjuna said that he wanted a stronger bow and inexhaustible arrows, and a resplendent chariot to ride in, and that krishna needed a weapon with which he could slay naagas and pishaacas . then agni thought of varuna, who presented arjuna with the gaandiva bow two inexhaustible quivers a chariot yoked with horses. then agni gave to krishna a discus . varuna, after this, gave to krishna the mace kaumodaki . they were then ready to fight, and agni began to consume the forest . arjuna and krishna prevented the creatures from escaping. even the gods became afraid and applied to indra. indra poured n showers of rain, that were at first dried up in the sky by the heat of the fire . when more rain was poured n, arjuna dispelled it with a shower of his weapons. takshaka was not present, having gone to kurukshetra. but his son ashvasena was there his mother, a she snake, attempted to swallow him, but had her head cut off by arjuna indra, raising a violent wind, for a moment deprived arjuna of his consciousness, during which time ashvasena effected his escape, being cursed by krishna, arjuna, and agni . indra assailed arjuna with clouds, which were dispersed by the vaayavya weapon, and with a shower of stones, and with a peak from the mandara, but in vain. garutmat and other birds, and naagas, who also assailed krishna and arjuna, were vanquished and as g y raa and naagas were defeated by arjuna, as were the dai. and daa. by krishna with his discus. they were also attacked by yama with his death dealing mace, kubera with his spiked club, varuna with his noose and beautiful missile, skanda with his long lance, the ashvins with resplendent plants, dhaatri with his bow, jaya with a thick club, tvashtri with a huge mountain, surya with a bright shakti, mrityu with a battle axe, aryaman with a bludgeon furnished with sharp spikes, mitra with a discus sharp as a razor, pushan, bhaga, savitri, r m . and s. . with his discus krishna slaughtered psh n raa daa as etc. the gods retired from the scene. indra became filled with joy and applauded krishna and arjuna. an incorporeal voice addressed him, saying that takshaka was in kurukshetra, and that krishna and arjuna, being the old rishis and gods nara and naaraa yana, were invincible, and that the destruction of the forest of khaandava had been ordained by fate. then also indra went back to heaven. the vidyaadharas, etc dwelling in that forest, all became frightened. agni, drinking the nectar like stream of animal fat, became filled with joy. when the asura maya, the brother of namuci, was about to be slain by krishna and burnt by agni, arjuna rescued him. agni burnt the forest for fifteen days, sparing only six of its dwellers ashvasena, maya, and four shaarngakas . when agni had consumed fat, marrow, and flesh in abundance, and burnt the forest for fifteen days, he became gratified and extinguished himself. indra, with m appeared before krishna and arjuna, and granted them a boon. arjuna asked him to give him all his weapons, and indra promised to give them when mahaadeva had been pleased with him. to krishna he granted that his friendship with arjuna should be eternal. then he ascended to heaven with the celestials. arjuna, vaasudeva, and the daanava maya, having wandered a little, sat n on the bank of a river .
khaandavaayana, pl a family of brahmans .
khaninetra, a king, son of vivimsha and father of suvarcas. c . king vivimsha had fifteen sons, all powerful archers, revering brahmans, etc. the eldest brother kh. oppressed them all, but having conquered the entire king he could not retain it, as the people were not pleased with him they dethroned him and installed his son suvarcas as king, and then they rejoiced, .
khara, a raakshasa, son of vishravas .
kharajanghaa, a maatri. u, .
kharakarni, a maatri. u, .
khari, a maatri. u, .
khattaanga, v. khatvaanga.
khatvaanga1, an ancient king .
khecara said of the devaduta, .
khyaataa, a maatri. u, .
kicaka, the senaapati and brother in law of viraata o nihato yathaa, all. to karnap.sagano hata, aishikap.viraatanagare kena bhrshaarditaam, sc. krishnaa, raajadh.ena padaa vadham, ashvamedhikap.ena padaa vadha
kicaka, pl a tribe or family . suta, pl sutaputra, pl.
the of the minor parvans of mhbhr. the paandavas thus passed ten months in matsyas city. as the year was about to expire, kicaka, the senaapati and brother in law of viraata, became enamoured of krishnaa, who rebuked him and warned him of the gandharvas, her husbands . then he caused sudeshnaa to send krishnaa to him to fetch wine. krishnaa aed the sun, who commanded a raakshasa to protect her invisibly . as kicaka seized her, she dashed him to the ground and rushed to yudhishthira, followed by kicaka, who brought her n and seized her by the hair, but the raakshasa gave him a push, so that he fell n senseless. yudhishthira, apprehensive of discovery, commanded bhimasena to forbear. krishnaa rebuked viraata and was praised by the courtiers, but sent back to sudeshnaa by yudhishthira the gandharvas will surely dispel thy woe. sudeshnaa said shall cause kicaka to be slain, if thou wishest it. krishnaa answered even others will slay him . krishnaa rose up at night and proceeded to bhimasena, and complained of their plight and especially that of sahadeva . bhimasena exhorted her to endure a little longer, reminding her of sukanyaa, indrasenaa, sitaa, lopaamudraa, and saavitri, and said to morrow evening you should manage to have a meeting with kicaka in the dancing hall, but so that others may not espy thee. kicaka came to the rendezvous and was slain by bhimasena, and krishnaa said to the keepers of the dancing hall kicaka has been slain by my gandharva husbands . kicakas relatives obtained permission from viraata to cremate krishnaa with him, and carried her towards the burning place. she cried jaya, etc. . bhimasena hearing it, came and slew of them with a tree . viraata got afraid and caused sudeshnaa to ask krishnaa to leave the country, but she obtained permission to remain for thirteen days .
kimjapya, a tirtha .
kimpunaa, a river .
kimpurusha, pl a class of beings . c, . b, .
kindama, a muni .
kindaana, a tirtha .
kindatta, a tirtha .
kinkara1, a raakshasa .
kinkara2, the rod of mrityu or yama .
kinkara, pl a tribe of raakshasas .
kinkinikaashrama, a tirtha. k, .
kinnara, pl a class of beings . d, . b, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . f, . b, . g, . e, .
kinnari, sg. and pl . e, .
kiraata, pl a barbarous people . g, .
kiraata, sg. = shiva in the shape of a k when he fought with arjuna, .
kiritin5, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kirmira, a raakshasa .
kirmiravadhaparvan . vidura had heard it from the paandavas and now related it to dhritaraashtra. departing from haastinapura and travelling for three days and nights the paandavas reached the kaamyaka wood. at midnight a man eating raakshasa, kirmira, brother of baka and friend of hidimba, obstructed their path with a lighted brand, and would avenge himself on bhima. krishnaa was afraid. dhaumya destroyed his illusion by raakshasa destroying mantras. arjuna stringed his bow gaandiva but bhima, making him desist, fought with trees, etc against kirmira, as the brothers vaali and sugriva had e of yore for the sake of the same woman. at last bhima seized him with his arms and whirled him about and killed him. then placing krishnaa in their front they set out for dvaitavana. having cleared the forest of its pest they began to live there. passing through the forest, saw the body of the raakshasa, and heard the story from the brahmans .
kirti, a goddess .
kirtimat2, a vishvadeva .
kirtivarman, a paandava warrior .
kishkindhaa, a city .
kishkindhyaa, v. kishkindhaa.
kita . b, etc.
kitaka, a prince .
kitava, pl a people .
. b . bhishma said in days of old, when the emancipated brahman vyaasa roamed over the world, he saw a worm speedily moving on a chariot road. asked by vyaasa, who was omniscient and knew the language of every animal, the worm said that it was running away from a large cart, lest it should be killed every creature, in whatever situation it may be placed, becomes attached to it in even this order of being am happy, think, and wish to live in his former life he was a cruel shudra, a usurer, etc never dedicating food to . and p etc. he now was filled with repentance and grief he had, however, worshipped his old mother, and once showed hospitality to a brahman in consequence thereof the memory had not forsaken him, and he thought he should once more regain happiness . vyaasa said it is the consequence of a meritorious act of mine that thou art not stupefied in consequence of my penances am able to rescue a being of demerit by the simply granting him sight of my person there is no stronger power than that of penances. thou mayst again attain to righteousness and merit the state of a worm is really fraught with great misery. the superior brahman worships the sun and the moon uttering mantras when thou hast attained to that state, shall impart to thee braahman. the worm remained and was killed by the cart. he was reborn in diverse orders of being, such as a porcupine, iguana, boar, deer, bird, caandaala, shudra, and vaishya. born at last as a kshatriya through the grace of vyaasa, he came and worshipped him. vyaasa said that the sin of his former life had yet not been destroyed he should become a brahman by giving up his life on the field of battle for the sake of cows or brahmans performing many sacrifices he should attain to heaven, and after emancipation he should enjoy eternal happiness. the ascending order of transmigration is animal shudra vaishya kshatriya brahman svarga . he betook himself to severe austerities vyaasa went to him and said that the penances of the kshatriyas consist in the protection of all creatures thereby he should attain to the state of a brahman. then he protected his subjects righteously, and after death became a brahman. vyaasa came and told him not to fear death, but only the loss of righteousness. he caused the earth to be marked with sacrificial stakes, and then obtained a residence in the region of brahmaan himself, and obtained the eternal braahman by his own acts, according to the words of vyaasa. also the kshatriyas, who have been slain, have attained to a meritorious end therefore, not mourn on their account .
koshaa, a river . koshala, koshalaa, koshalaraaja, koshalaadhipa, kosha laadhipati, koshaleshvara, koshalendra, v. kos.
koshika, pl v. kaashika, pl.
kohala, a rishi .
kokaamukha, a tirtha . x, .
kokanada, pl a people .
kokanada, various warriors of skanda. u, .
kokaraka, pl a people .
kokila, name of a mouse .
kokilaka, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kolagiri, a mountain .
kolaahala, a mountain .
kolisarpa, pl a people .
kolvagireya, pl a people .
konkana, pl v. kaunkana, pl.
konvashira, pl a people .
kopavega, a muni .
kosala, pl a people . kausalya, pl.
kosalaadhipati1, the king of the kosalas at the time of yudhishthira . brihadbala.
kosalaka, adj. .
koshaa, a river .
koshthavat, a mountain. g, .
kotaraa, a maatri. u, .
kotaraka, a serpent .
kotisha, a serpent .
kotikaasya, a prince, follower of jayadratha . kotika.
kotitirtha, name of various tirthas .
kramajit, a prince .
krami, pl v. krimi, pl.
kratha1, an asura .
kratha2, a king .
kratha3, a king . kratha2.
kratha4, a rishi .
kratha5, a kuru warrior .
kratha6, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kratha7, pl a people .
kraatha1, son of the elder dhritaraashtra .
kraatha2, various princes . b, อด, . kraathaadhipa, kraathaputra.
kraatha3, a monkey .
kraatha4, son of dhritaraashtra . krathana3.
kraatha6, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kraatha7, a serpent .
krathana1, a naaga .
krathana2, an asura .
krathana3, son of dhritaraashtra .
kraathaputra, a prince . kraatha2.
kratu1, a rishi, son of brahmaan . u, . b, . b, . c, . b, .
kraunca1, a mountain . u, . krauncaparvata.
kraunca2, a mountain on krauncadvipa .
kraunca, a kind of battle array .
krauncadvipa, name of a dvipa .
krauncanisudaka, kraunca splitter, i.e. skanda .
krauncapadi, a tirtha. s, .
krauncaaruna, a kind of battle array .
kravyaada, pl. = raakshasa, pl .
kravyaada, pl one of the three classes of pitris .
kriyaa, daughter of daksha and wife of dharma .
kroshanaa, a maatri. u, .
krodha1 . b, . b, . f, .
krodha2, an asura .
krodhaa, daughter of daksha .
krodhashatru, an asura .
krodhahantri, an asura .
krodhana1, a rishi .
krodhanaa, a maatri. u, .
krodhavasha, pl a class of raakshasas . e, .
krodhavasha, a raakshasa .
krodhavasha gana .
krodhavardhana, an asura .
kroncapadi, v. krauncapadi.
kroshtri, a prince, one of the ancestors of krishna. b, .
krisha1, a son of a rishi .
krisha2, a serpent .
krisha3, a rishi .
krishaashva, an ancient king .
krishaka, a serpent .
krikaneyu, son of raudraashva .
krimi, pl a people .
krimi, a river .
kripa, a brahman, son of sharadvat and brother of kripi . c, .
kripa2, an ancient king .
kripi, sister of kripa, wife of drona, and mother of ashvatthaa man . shaaradvati, gautami.
krishibala, a rishi .
krishna1, son of vasudeva and devaki, husband of rukmini, etc and father of pradyumna, shaamba, etc a prince of the daashaarhas, considered as an avataara of vishnu, the supreme god . b, . b arjuna enumerates the feats of k. k. wandered for, years on gandhamaadana as a muni, who had his home where he happened to be when evening fell he dwelt for, years at pushkara, subsisting on water alone he stood for years at badari on one leg with arms uplifted, subsisting on air he performed a twelve years sattra on the banks of the sarasvati, emaciated and without upper garments he stood for divine years on one leg at the tirtha prabhaasa vyaasa had told that k. was the cause of the creation, etc. he slew naraka bhauma and took his ear rings, and then let loose the first sacrificial horse he slew all the daityas and daanavas and bestowed on indra the sovereignty of the universe he took birth among men having been naaraayana, he became hari, brahmaan, surya, dharma, dhaatri, yama, anala, vaayu, vaishravana, rudra, kaala, the firmament, the earth, and the ten directions, etc. in the forest of caitraratha he gratified the highest god with sacrifices and at each sacrifice he offered gold by hundreds of thousands becoming vishnu, the son of aditi, and the younger brother of indra, he, even while a child, pervaded, in three steps, the heaven, the firmament, and the earth, and, standing in the abode of the sun, outshone him by his splenr in thousands of incarnations he slew sinful asuras by hundreds he cut the bonds of muru, killed nisunda and naraka, and again rendered safe the road of praagjyotisha he slew aahvriti at jaaruthi, and also kraatha, shishupaala with his adherents, jaraasandha, shaibya, and shatadhanvan on his chariot, roaring like clouds, he conquered his queen, the daughter of the bhoja king by defeating in battle rukmin he slew indradyumna and the yavana kasherumat he slew shaalva, the lord of saubha, and destroyed saubha at iraavati he slew bhoja, who was equal to kaartavirya in battle he slew gopati and taalaketu he had appropriated to himself the wealthy and holy dvaarakaa, beloved by the rishis and will again submerge it within the ocean at the end of the yuga he had contracted all beings and with drawn the whole universe into his own self in the beginning of the yuga brahmaan sprung from the lotus of his navel when the daanavas madhu and kaitabha were bent upon slaying brahmaan, there sprang from his forehead shambhu, the holder of the trident with three eyes thus these two foremost deities had sprung from his body to his work this naarada had told the deeds he performed when a boy, assisted by baladeva, never had been e nor would be e by others he dwelt on kailaasa together with brahmans. k. said to arjuna thou art mine and am thine, those who are mine are also thine, he who hates thee hates me, and he who follows thee follows me thou art nara and am hari naaraayana we are the rishis nara and naaraayana born in the world in time thou art the same as and am the same as thou there is no difference between us. draupadi said they say that in the creation of beings thou art the one prajaapati asita devala called thee the creator of all worlds jaamadagnya said that thou art vishnu, the sacrifice, the sacrificer, and he to whom the sacrifice is performed the rishis call thee forgiveness and truth kashyapa said that thou art sacrifice sprung from truth naarada called thee the lord of the lords of the saadhyas, gods and shivas, the creator and the lord of all things thou sportest with the hosts of the gods, including brahmaan, shankara, and shakra, etc even as a child with his toys the firmament is covered by thy head and the earth by thy feet, these worlds are thy womb, thou art the eternal purusha thou art the best of the rishis, sanctified with vedic lore, etc...the refuge of the raajarshis...the supreme lord of all creatures celestial and human, . b, will assist the paandavas, .vishnu, worshipped shiva at suvarnadhaumyatirthak.aaniloddhuta...arjunodirito meghagovinda, etc resided in dvaarakaa, identified with the supreme god, .balaraamatirthayaatraap.returned homeengaged in penances on the yamunaaaajagarap.suparnaketumaarkandeyas.came to the paandavas in the kaamyaka forestsya mahishi, i.e. satyabhaamaa, .vaarshneya, identical with naaraayana, .indradyumnop.devakiputrenaapi kena narake majja maano raajarshir nrigas tasmaat kricchraat puna samuddhrita svargam praapita, draupadi satya bhaamaasamv.sya mahishi priyaa, i.e. satyabhaamaasya mahishi priyaa, i.e. satya bhaamaamahishi, i.e. satyabhaamaa, k and satyabhaamaa returned home, .draupadiharanap.kamsanisudanam, prayed to by draupadi, who praised k. with the hymn v. b foll.shrik. came to draupadis assistance when durvaasas, etc visited the paandavasvishnuvishnushankhacakragadaadharamkarnaidentical with naaraayana, yam aahur vedavidvaamso vaaraaham aparaajitam f, .paandavapraveshap.satyabhaamaam ksya mahishim priyaamgoharanap.maadhavamall. to subhadraaharanaparvandevakiputraat, .sainyodyogap. shrireturned to dvaarakaapage4 b pitaambaradharo jagatsrashtaa janaardanaduryodhana obtained from k. the naaraayanas as his allies, arjuna that k. became his charioteersanjayayaanap.sya buddhyaa yudhyeta ko nara, has slain shishupaala, vrishny andhakaa hy ugrasenaadayo vai kpranitaa vaasudevayaanasandhip.sama, sc. abhimanyuvaasudeva...sugrivayuktena rathenakapaatena, v. the note of pcr p. i.e. kamsai.e. indraogharaksha, which by nil. is taken as a raakshasa named oghai.e. krishnavishno friend of the paandavasnara naaraayanauk. is identical with naaraayana, arjuna with narayaanasandhip dvitiyo vikramya tushtyartham jaatavedasa, sc. arjuna all. to khaandavadahanaparvansadrisho virye, sc. abhimanyu, shreshtho jagatapradhaanaa, sc. mahaarathaamukhyam andhaka vrishninaam, among the allies of yudhishthira dhananjayaudvitiyena dhananjayenapundarikaaksham, yata ks tato jaya etymology sanjaya explained the names of k. vaasudeva, etc .bhagavadyaanap.k. promised to go to haastinapura and try to obtain peace, yadusukhaavaham vaasavaanujam, worshipped by the rishis k. set out for haastina pura, . f, . d, อด, อด, อด, อด, . ee, . b, . b
krishna3, a serpent .
krishna5, a mountain .
krishna6, a warrior of skanda. u, .
krishna7, a rishi .
krishnaa, a river .
krishnaa, a maatri. u, .
krishnaa gangaa, a river. m, .
krishnakesha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
krishnaanubhautika, a rishi .
krishnasya sabhaapravesha .
krishnaatreya, a rishi .
krishnavarnaa, a maatri. u, .
krishnavenaa, a river .
krishnaveni, krishnavenvaa, v. krishnavenaa.
krita, a vishvadeva .
krita, a term of dice .
kritabandhu, an ancient king .
kritacetas, a brahman .
kritashauca, a tirtha .
kritashrama, a muni .
. b bhishma related gautama, a brahman, belonging to the middle country, devoid of vedic learning, entered a village desirous of obtaining charity. in that village lived a robber, possessed of great wealth, devoted to the brahmans, etc. he gave to gautama a piece of new cloth, a wied young woman, and a house. gautama lived happily in that village of aborigines for many years, helping the relatives of his wife, the female slave . he began to practise archery, and went into the woods and killed wild cranes, etc in abundance, and became like one of the robbers. one day a brahman, devoted to the study of the vedas, etc and who did never accept any food if given by a shudra, came to the house of his ancient friend gautama. seeing gautama, who resembled a cannibal, he exhorted him to aban his sinful mode of life. gautama, repenting, agreed to leave this village next morning with his guest, who passed the night there, refraining touching anything . next morning, when the guest had left the house, gautama proceeded towards the sea, having met with a caravan of merchants. the caravan was assailed by an infuriated elephant, but gautama managed to escape, and fled towards the north, not knowing whither he proceeded, wandering alone in the forest like a kimpurusha. at last he reached a delightful forest, resembling the very woods of nandana, and inhabited by y. and k aned with shaalas, etc with bhaarundas, bhulingas, etc. under a delightful banyan tree he fell asleep when the sun had set, the king of cranes, naadijangha or raajadharman, kashyapas son, the child of a celestial maiden, one of the daughters of daksha, and possessed of great wis and a friend of brahmaan, came home from brahmaloka. exhausted with hunger and thirst, gautama thought of slaying him. naadijangha welcomed gautama, and asked him to stay with him till the next morning . he, who equalled yama himself in his knowledge of duties, made for him a bed of the shaala flowers, and offered him large fishes from the bhaagirathi, etc. learning that he was desirous of going to the sea in order to earn wealth, he, quoting brihaspati as to the fourfold means of earning wealth, directed him in the morning to his friend, the chief of the raakshasas, virupaaksha, about yojanas away. gautama reached the city of meruvraja, and was welcomed by virupaaksha . though not satisfied with gautamas antecedents, virupaaksha, because gautama was a brahman, and for the sake of raaja dharman, entertained him with the, brahmans that were to be entertained in his house on the day of full moon of the kaarttika month . some amongst them were selected to represent the . p and the deities of fire. this he did every year on the aashaadhi and maaghi, and especially on the kaarttiki, after the expiry of the autumn, giving away gold, jewels, etc. on this one day there was no fear of raa. gautama came away with much wealth, and returned to raajadharman, who welcomed him. having no food to live on by the way, he thought of slaying raajadharman . this he did having plucked off the feathers and the n, he roasted the flesh, and taking it up together with the gold he had brought, he quickly fled from the spot. the next day virupaaksha became anxious because he had not for two mornings and two nights seen raajadharman, who when returning from brahmaloka every morning never went home without paying him a visit he suspected that gautama had slain him, and sent his son with other raa. to inquire after him. gautama was caught and brought to meruvraja as the raa. refused to eat the flesh of that great sinner, he was hacked into pieces, which were given away to the robbers. but the very robbers, though cannibals, refused to eat the flesh of that vile man . virupaaksha caused a funeral pyre, etc to be made for raajadharman. at that time the goddess surabhi, the daughter of daksha, appeared in the sky above the pyre from her mouth froth mixed with milk fell upon the funeral pyre, and raajadharman became revived. indra came and related that once raajadharman had absented himself from brahmaloka and was cursed by brahmaan, who said that he should not die soon therefore he has come back to life. asked by raajadharman on behalf of his dear friend gautama, indra sprinkled amrita over gautama, and restored him to life. raajadharman embraced him with great joy, dismissed him with his wealth, and returned home. at the due hour he repaired to brahmaloka and was honoured by brahmaan. gautama begot many sinful children upon his shudraa wife. according to a heavy curse denounced upon him by the gods, he afterwards had to sink into a terrible hell for many years. all this was recited to me formerly by naarada.
kritakshana, a prince .
kritaastra, a prince .
kritavaac, a brahman .
kritavandhu, v. kritabandhu.
kritavarman, a vrishni prince, son of hridika อด, อด, naaraayanaavasheshai, sc. vritashalyap.among the three only remnants of duryodhanas armysaatvata traigartai parivaarita, on the left side of shalyas array deprived of his chariot by saatyakiwas vanquished by saatyakisaatvata saatvata saatvatahradapraveshap.among the three only remnants of duryo dhanas armybhojam, saatvata baladevatirthayaatraagadaayuddhap.saatvatasauptikap.saatvatasaatvatatook part in the nightly encountersaatvata, came to the dying duryodhanaaishikap.jalapradaanikap.returned to his own countrystrivilaapap.anugitaap.accompanied krishnamausalap.saatyaki slew him, svargaaro hanap.haardikya, after death he entered the gana of the marutsthe son of hridikadrauni h gautamaa, all. to sauptikaparvankkkkksaatvatakbhojakkk
kritavega, an ancient king .
kritavirya, an ancient king bis .
kritayuga, name of the first yuga . bis, . v, . b, . c, . b, . g, . b, . devayuga, krita.
kriti1, an ancient king .
kriti2, a vishvadeva .
kritin, a king .
krittikaa, pl the six wives of the seven rishis, name of a constellation . u, . f, . k, . u, . b, . b, .
krityaa, a river .
krityaa, foll foll.
kshanabhojin, a prince .
kshapaacara, pl. = raakshasa, pl . do. sg .
kshapanaka, a religious mendicant, .
kshatradeva, son of shikhandin . shaikhandi, shikhanditanaya.
kshatradharman, son of dhrishtadyumna . dhrishtadyumnasuta, kshatravarman, saumaki.
kshatrahan, a paandava warrior .
kshatranjaya, a paandava warrior .
kshaudra, name of a caste, .
kshema, a prince .
kshemaa, an apsaras .
kshemasharman, a kuru warrior .
kshemadarshin, king of the kosalas . kausalya, kosalaadhipa.
kshemadarshiya, adj. .
kshemadhanvan, a kuru warrior .
kshemadhurti, one or more princes .
kshemaka1, a serpent .
kshemaka2, a prince .
kshemakirti, a kuru warrior .
kshemamurti, a son of dhritaraashtra .
kshemankara, a trigarta king, follower of jayadratha . traigarta, trigartaraaja.
kshemavaaha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kshemavarman, a paandava warrior .
kshemavriddhi, the generalissimo of shaalva .
kshemi, a paandava warrior .
kshetrajna, the supreme soul in the form of the individual soul, often identified with krishna, .
kshiravati, a tirtha .
kshiroda1 . c, . b, . d, . g, . kshirodadhi.
kshirodadhi . b, . c, . kshiroda1.
kshitikampana, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kshubhaa. b, .
kshudra1, name of a caste, .
kshudraka, pl a people .
kshupa, a rishi . b, . prajaanaam adhipa, prajaapati.
kshurakarni, a maatri. u, .
kubalaashva, v. kuvalaashva.
kubera, the lord of riches, regent of the northern quarter, king of the guhyakas, raakshasas, and yakshas, husband of riddhi . c, . d, . e, . x in days of yore, kubera, the chief of the yakshas, practised austerities there and obtained many boons the lordship of all treasures, the friendship of rudra, the state of a god, the state of a lokapaala, and a son, nalakubara. the maruts installed him. he also obtained a celestial chariot, fleet as thought, yoked with hamsas, the vimaana pushpaka, and the lordship of the nairritas, . b, . g, . f, . g, . also the following synonyms alakaadhipa, q.v. dhanada, . dhanadeshvara, . dhanaadhigoptri, . dhanaadhipa, . dhanaadhipati, . dhanaadhyaksha, . dhanaanaam ishvara, . dhanapati, . dhanesha, . dhaneshvara, . dravinapati, . gadaadhara, . guhyakaadhipa, guhyakaadhipati, q.v. kailaasanilaya, . naravaahana, . nidhipa, . paulastya, raajaraaja, raajaraajan, raakshasaa dhipati, raakshaseshvara, q.v. vaishravana, . vittagoptri, . vittaanaam pati, . vittapati, . vittesha, . yakshaadhipa, yakshaadhipati, yakshapati, yakshapravara, yaksharaaj, yaksharaaja, yaksharaajan, yaksha raakshasabhartri, yaksharakshodhipa, q.v.
kubjaamraka, a tirtha .
kuciraa, a river .
kushabindu, pl a people .
kushaciraa, a river .
kushadhaaraa, a river .
kushadvipa, one of the seven dvipas . e, .
kushaadya, pl a people .
kushala1, a region in krauncadvipa .
kushala2, pl a people .
kushalya, pl a people .
kushaamba, son of vasu uparicara .
kushaplavana, a tirtha .
kushastamba, a tirtha. l, .
kushasthala, a village . avisthala.
kushaavarta, a tirtha. f, .
kushavat, a lake .
kushavati, a city .
kushavindu, pl v. kushabindu, pl.
kusheshaya1, a mountain in kushadvipa .
kushika, an ancient king . b, . b, . c, . kushikarshi.
kushika, pl a family, the descendants of kushika . c, .
kushm, v. kushm.
kuhara1, a king .
kuhara2, a serpent .
kuhu . u, .
kukkura, a muni .
kukkura, pl a people . kukura, pl.
kukkutikaa, a maatri. u, .
kukshi1, a daanava .
kukshi2, b, dishaam paalaaya, son of raibhya
kukuna, a serpent .
kukura1, a serpent .
kukura2, an ancient king .
kukura, pl a people . kukkura, pl.
kulaadya, pl v. kushaadya, pl.
kulampuna, a tirtha .
kulampunaa, a river .
kulattha, pl a people .
kulika, a serpent .
kulinda, pl a people .
kulinatyaka, pl a people .
kulinga, pl v. kulinda, pl.
kuluta, pl a people .
kulyaa, a tirtha. y, .
kumaara2, a prince .
kumaara3, a suparna, son of garuda .
kumaara4, a paancaala prince .
kumaara6, pl a people .
kumaara7, pl a class of demons .
kumaaradhaaraa, a tirtha .
kumaaraka, a serpent .
kumaaraka, pl. = kumaara7, pl .
kumaarakoti, a tirtha .
kumaari, wife of the elder bhimasena .
kumaari, wife of dhananjaya .
kumaari, a river .
kumaari, a river in shaakadvipa. b, .
kumaari, pl name of a tirtha .
kumaari, pl a class of demons .
kumaarikaa, pl a country .
kumbha1, an asura .
kumbhaka, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kumbhakarna1, a raakshasa, brother of raavana . rakshas, raakshaseshvara, raaksha sendra.
kumbhakarnaashrama, a tirtha .
kumbhakarna ate bala, candabala, vajra baahu, and other monkeys, then he fought with sugriva and lakshmana when his arms were cut off ble the number of arms appeared at last lakshmana killed him with the brahmaastra. the raakshasas fled. lakshmana fought with vajravega and pramaathin hanumat killed vajravega, and nala killed pramaathin .
prahasta was killed by vibhishana and dhumraaksha by hanumat. the raakshasas fled and informed raavana, who roused kumbhakarna and sent him out with vajravega and pramaathin .
kumbhaandaka, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kumbharetas, a fire .
kumbhavaktra, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kumbhayoni1, an apsaras .
kumbhikaa, a maatri. u, .
kumbhinasi, an asura .
kumbhinasi, the wife of the gandharva citraratha .
kumuda1, a serpent .
kumuda2, a monkey .
kumuda3, an elephant .
kumuda4, a suparna, son of garuda .
kumuda5, a mountain in kushadvipa .
kumuda6, a companion of skanda. u, .
kumuda7, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kumudaaksha, a serpent .
kumudamaalin, a companion of skanda. u, .
kumutara, a varsha in shaakadvipa. b, .
kunaadika, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kunda1, a companion of skanda. u, .
kunda1, a son of dhritaraashtra .
kunda2, a serpent .
kundabheda, a son of dhritaraashtra . next.
kundabhedin, a son of dhritaraashtra .
kundashaayin, a son of dhritaraashtra .
kundaashin, a son of dhritaraashtra .
kundadhaara1, a son of dhritaraashtra .
kundadhaara2, name of two serpents .
kundadhaara3, name of a cloud .
kundadhaara4, a rishi .
kundaja, a son of dhritaraashtra .
kundajathara, a rishi .
kundaka, a son of dhritaraashtra . kunda1.
kundala, a serpent .
kundala, pl a people .
kundalaa, a river .
the fiftieth of the minor parvans of mhbhr. asked by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related how indra removed yudhishthiras fear of karna, as he had promised to yudhishthira through lomasha in the thirteenth year of the exile of the paandavas, indra resolved, in the guise of a brahman, to ask karna for his ear rings and mail for the benefit of arjuna. surya then came to karna in a dream and dissuaded him from giving them. there is beside some mystery which you will understand in time. karna refused to break his vow always to give to brahmans and confided in the weapons which he had obtained from raama jaamadagnya and drona. surya then prevailed upon him to beseech indra to give him a dart . karna .
kundali, v. kundalaa.
kundalin1, a suparna, son of garuda .
kundalin2, a son of dhritaraashtra .
kundaarikaa, a maatri. u, .
kundika, son of dhritaraashtra4 .
kundina1, son of dhritaraashtra4 .
kundina2, the capital of the vidarbhas .
kundivisha, pl a people .
kundivrisha, pl. v. kaundivrisha, pl.
kundoda, a mountain .
kundodara1, a serpent .
kundodara2, a son of dhritaraashtra1 .
kundodara3, son of janamejaya5 .
kunjala, a warrior of skanda. u, .
kunjara1, a serpent .
kunjara2, a prince .
kuntala, pl a people .
kunthaka, pl a people .
kunti1 . kuntibhoja.
kunti2, a vrishni .
kunti, pl a people .
kunti, daughter of shura, ated by kuntibhoja, by surya mother of karna, wife of paandu, and mother of yudhishthira, bhimasena, and arjuna her proper name was prithaa . shura gave his daughter prithaa as daughter to kuntibhoja, the son of his paternal aunt, who was without offspring. durvaasas, satisfied with her worshipful attentions, gave her a mantra by which she could summon whatever deity she liked and obtain children. thus by arka she brought forth in secrecy a child who was born with ear rings and a coat of mail. kunti threw him into the water, .
kuntibhoja, name of the ative father of kunti, and of the brother of kunti . kunti, kuntiraaja, purujit.
kuntibhojasutaasuta, pl. = kaunteya, pl .
kuntiputra, dual, .
kuntiputra, pl. = kaunteya, pl .
kuntisuta, dual, .
kuntisuta, pl. = kaunteya, pl .
. at her svayamvara prithaa chose paandu for her husband .
kupa1, a tirtha .
kupata, an asura .
kupatha, an asura .
kuranga, name of a country e, .
kurcaamukha, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
kurma, a serpent .
kuru1, an ancient king, the son of samvarana and the ancestor of the kurus . i, . kk, .
kurudvaha, pl .
kurujaangala, name of a country . b, .
kurujaangala, pl the inhabitants of kurujaangala . jaangala, pl kuru, pl.
kurukshetra . at the sight of k. all creatures are freed from sin, as also he who constantly says will live in k. has his sins destroyed and goes to brahmaloka the mere dust of k. leads even a sinful man to bliss it lies to the south of the sarasvati and to the north of the drishadvati there one should reside for a month on the sarasvati, where the gods headed by brahmaan, the rishis, the siddhas, the caaranas, the gandharvas, the apsarases, the yakshas, and the pannagas repair to the highly sacred brahmakshetra a visit there ensures the merit of the raajasuya and the horse sacrifice, . naimisha is the foremost tirtha with regard to merit on earth, pushkara with regard to merit in the firmament, k. with regard to merit in the three worlds the mere dust of k. leads even a sinful man to bliss they who reside in k which lies to the south of the sarasvati and to the north of the drishadvati, really reside in heaven . he who merely expresses the wish to go to k. becomes cleansed of his sins. k. is the altar of brahmaan worshipped by the brahmarshis the country between tarantuka and arantuka and raamas lakes and macakruka, that kurukshetra samantapancaka is styled the northern altar of pitaamaha, . i, . kk, . b, . b, . b, . brahmakshetra, brahmavedi, dharmakshetra, samanta pancaka.
kurukshetrakathana . kk the ri. said to bala raama this samantapancaka is said to be the eternal northern altar of prajaapati there, in days of yore, the gods performed a great sacrifice. the r. ri. kuru had cultivated this field for many years hence it came to be called kurukeshetra . requested by bala raama, the ri. related in days of yore kuru was engaged in perseveringly tilling this field requested by indra, he said those that will die upon this plain, shall proceed to regions of bliss after being cleansed of their sins. shakra, ridiculing this, went back to heaven. this happened repeatedly. indra summoned the gods, who asked him to stop kuru by granting him a boon if men, by only dying there, were to come to heaven, without having performed sacrifices to us, our very existence would be endangered. indra then came, and they agreed that kuru should not toil any more but those that would die there, having abstained from food, with all their senses awake, and those that would perish there in battle, should go straight to heaven. it was sanctioned by all the principal gods, headed by brahmaan, that on earth there should be no more sacred spot than this those men that per formed austere penances here would all, after laying n their bodies, go to brahmaans abode those who gave away their wealth here would soon have their wealth bled those who would reside constantly here would never have to behold the region of yama those kings that would perform great sacrifices here would reside as long in heaven as earth would last. indra had himself composed a verse here and sang it the very dust of kurukshetra... shall cleanse persons of wicked acts and carry them to heaven. the principal gods, brahmans, kings as nriga, etc having performed costly sacrifices here, have, after abaning their bodies, proceeded to heaven. the space between tarantuka and arantuka and the lakes of raama and macakruka, this kurukshetra samantapancaka is called the northern altar of prajaapati. all that shakra said was approved by brahmaan, vishnu, and maheshvara .
kurunandana, pl. = the sons of paandu, .
kurupravira, pl. = kuru, pl. .
kurupungava, pl. = kuru, pl. .
kururaajaputra, dual and pl .
kurusattama, pl. = kuru, pl. .
kurusimha, pl. = kuru, pl. .
kurutirtha, name of a tirtha .
kuruttama, pl. = kuru, pl. .
kuruvamshavivardhana, pl .
kuruvarnaka, pl a people .
kuruvinda, pl a people .
kusasthali, v. kushasthali.
kushmaanda, name of a mantra, .
kushmaandaka, a serpent .
kustumbaru, a yaksha .
kusuma, a companion of skanda. u, .
kutara, a serpent .
kuthaara, a serpent .
kutimukha, a follower of shiva .
kuttaaparanta, pl a people .
kuvalaashva, a king of ayodhyaa, the slayer of dhundhu . b, . dhundhumaara, ikshvaaku.
labdhalaksha, a paandava warrior .
ladaka, pl a people .
laghanti, a river .
lakshanaa, an apsaras .
lakshmana1, son of dasharatha and sumitraa and brother of raama . also the following synonyms ikshvaakunandana, . kaakutstha, . raaghava, . raamaanuja, . saumitri, .
lakshmana2, son of duryodhana dhaartaraashtra . duryodhanasuta, kurushaardula.
lakshmi . b, . u, . b, . b, . b, . shri.
lalitaka, v. lalitika.
lalitika, a tirtha .
lalitika, a tirtha . the prec.
lalittha, pl a people .
lalittha, sg. .
lambaa, a maatri. u, .
lambapayodharaa, a maatri. u, .
lambini, a maatri. u, .
lampaaka, pl a people .
laangali, a river .
langhati, v. laghanti.
lankaa, the city of raavana, formerly belonging to kubera .
lankaapravesha . . raavana made lankaa yet more strong and armed his warriors. raama sent the monkey angada as messenger to raavana. angada delivered the message of raama release sitaa. raavana became furious. angada leaped up with four raakshasas and then let them fall then he leaped over the walls of lankaa and informed raama. raama, lakshmana, vibhishana, and jaambavat with monkeys and bears attacked lankaa and pulled n the fortifications. then the host of the raakshasas set out at the command of raavana. a great battle ensued at last raama withdrew his troops .
lapetikaa, a tirtha .
lapitaa, the second wife of mandapaala .
lataa, an apsaras .
laata, pl a people .
lauhitya1, name of an ocean . lohita udadhi.
lauhitya2, a river, the present brahmaputra . lohita, lohityaa.
lauhitya3, a tirtha . u, . lauhitya2.
lavaa, pl. = shiva .
lavana1, an asura .
lavana2, a raakshasa. g, .
lavanaashva, a rishi .
lavanajala, cf .
lekha, pl a class of gods .
likhita, an ancient rishi, brother of shankha . brahmarshi.
lilaadhya, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
lilaayudha, v. nilaayudha.
linga, the phallus of shiva .
loha, pl a people .
lohajangha, pl a people .
lohaajavaktra, a warrior of skanda. u, .
lohamekhalaa, a matri. u, .
lohataarini, a river .
lohita1, a serpent .
lohita3, a river . lauhitya, lohityaa.
lohita udadhi . cf .
lohitaaksha1, name of a suta . suta.
lohitaaksha2, a companion of skanda. u, .
lohitaakshi, a maatri. u, .
lohitaarani, v. lohataarini.
lohityaa, a river . lohita, lauhitya.
loka, pl a class of gods .
lokabhaavana, adj .
lokaguru, said of duryodhana, .
lokaanaam maatara, i.e. the kine, .
lokanaatha, said of princes, .
lokapa, pl .
lokapaala, sg. names of single lokapaalas agni, . kubera, . varuna, . yama, .
. while the paandavas were sitting in that palace, with the great gandharvas, there came unto them the devarshi naarada, having wandered over the different worlds, accompanied by the rishis paarijaata, raivata, sumukta, and saumya. naarada informed yudhishthira about religion, pleasure, and profit, in the form of questions about his conduct. by following his advice yudhishthira conquered the whole earth . yudhishthira answered that he observed all those rules. then he asked naarada if he had ever seen a palace like his. naarada replied that no palace among men was like his, but that he would describe unto him the palaces of pitriraaja, varuna, indra, the dweller on kailaasa, and brahmaan, always worshipped by gods, pitris and saadhyas, etc. . shakrasabhaavarnana . yama sabhaavarnana . varunasabhaavarnana . vaishravanasabhaavarnana . brahma sabhaavarnana . yudhishthira said it appears that almost all the monarchs are in the sabhaa of yama the naagas, daityas, rivers, and oceans in that of varuna the yakshas, guhyakas, raakshasas, gandharvas, apsarases, and shiva in that of kubera the great rishis, and gods, and shaastras in that of pitaamaha and in that of shakra gods, gandharvas and various rishis, but only one king, the raajarshi harishcandra this is explained by naarada. paandu, beholding the good fortune of harishcandra, had asked naarada to tell yudhishthira to subjugate the whole earth and then perform a raajasuya. thereby also paandu and his ancestors would go to the region of indra. brahmarakshases, that destroy the sacrifices, always look for opportunities of obstructing it. then naarada went away to the city of the daashaarhas, accompanied by the rishis with whom he had come .
lokapitara, said of the seven rishis, .
lokayajna, a kind of sacrifice, .
lokeshvara, pl .
lokoddhaara, a tirtha .
lomasha1, a rishi . bis, . brahmarshi, devarshi.
lomasha2, name of a cat. b, .
lomaharshana, a suta, father of ugrashravas . suta.
lomapaada, king of the angas and father of shaantaa . d, . angaadhipati, angapati, angaraaja .
lopaamudraa, daughter of the vidarbha king and wife of agastya . vaidarbhi.
macakruka, name of a yaksha and of a tirtha belonging to him . kk, .
mashaka, pl a people in shaakadvipa. b, .
mada, an asura . n, . p, . b, . asura, daanava.
madadhaara, a king . mahidhara.
madaka, pl a people .
madayanti, wife of king kalmaashapaada . b commanded by her husband, m the wife of saudaasa kalmaashapaada obtained from the rishi vasishtha the son ashmaka, . b, .
madgura, name of a caste, .
maadhava6, v. maagadha .
maadhava7, name of a month .
maadhava8, a weapon of indra .
maadhavi, daughter of yayaati . yayaatijaa.
maadhavi, a maatri. u, .
madhu1, an ancient king .
madhu2, an asura, slain by krishna . b, . ee, . b, . b, . asura, asurendra, dual, daanava, dual, daanavendra, dual, kaitabha.
madhucchanda, a brahman . b, .
madhuhan =, .
madhukumbhaa, a maatri. u, .
madhulikaa, a maatri. u, .
madhumatta, pl a people .
madhuparka, a suparna, son of garuda .
madhura, a warrior of skanda. u, .
madhuraa, v. mathuraa.
madhurasvanaa, an apsaras .
madhusrava, a tirtha .
madhuvaahini, a river .
madhuvana, name of a forest .
madhuvarna, a warrior of skanda. u, .
madhuvati, a tirtha .
madhuvilaa, a river .
madhyadeshiya, adj .
madhyadeshya, pl. .
madhyamakeya, pl a people .
madiraa, one of the wives of vasudeva .
madiraashva2, an ancient king . b, .
madiraaksha, brother of viraata . madiraashva.
madra1, pl a people. d, . madraka, pl maadreya, pl.
madra2, pl. .
madraka, a prince . do. = shalya, q.v.
madraraaja1, = dyutimat, . do. = shalya, q.v. do. = ashvapati, .
maadravati, wife of parikshit .
maadri, the wife of paandu and mother of nakula and sahadeva . madraraajasutaa, maadravati.
maadrikaa, pl. .
magadha, pl a people . e, . g, . maagadha, pl.
magadha, v. maagadha9.
maagadha1, the ancestor of the maagadhas . f, .
maagadha, pl name of a caste, .
maghaa, mostly pl name of a nakshatra .
maagha, name of a month . p, .
maaghi, the day of full moon in the month of maagha. b, . p, . b, .
mahaabaahu1, two sons of dhritaraashtra .
mahaabalaa, name of two maatris. u, .
mahaabhaarata, the poem of vyaasa . the m. had been composed by vyaasa and was originally recited by vaishampaayana to janamejaya, afterwards by ugrashravas to shaunakaetymologyparvasangr.m aakhyaayaaadivamshaavataaranap.aakhyaanam, recited at the sacrifice of janamejayarecited by sauti, i.e. ugrashravasaakhyaanamaakhyaanametymologytribhir varshair...krishna dvaipaayane... mm aakhyaanam kritavaanvyaasavyaasa taught his disciples vedaan mpancamaannaaraayaniya krit, i.e. vyaasasvargaarohanap.of the m.page4 a v. samhitaami.e. vv. b v. one verse in b specification, etymologyaakhyanam
mahaabhauma, a prince .
mahaabhisha, a king .
. the raajarshi mahaa bhisha, of the race of ikshvaaku, had gratified indra by, horse sacrifices and raajasuyas and attained to svarga. one when the gods and raajarshis were worshipping brahmaan, the wind loosened the garments of gangaa. the gods bent n their heads, but mahaabhisha rudely stared at her, and for this brahmaan cursed him, saying that he should be reborn on earth, . he then wished to be born as a son of pratipa. the vasus had been cursed by the rishi vasishtha, whom they had crossed when he was engaged in his twilight aations, that they should be born among men. they chose to be born of gangaa as sons to shaantanu, who should be borne to pratipa, and gangaa promised that she would throw them into the water as soon as they were born, except one, upon whom they would each contribute one eighth of their energies, but who should be childless .
mahaabhuta, pl . bhuta, pl.
mahaacudaa, a maatri. u, .
mahaashankha, name of a tree in shankhatirtha. f, .
mahaashiras1, a muni .
mahaashiras2, an asura .
mahaashona, a river . shona.
mahaashrama, a tirtha . g, .
mahaashva, an ancient king .
mahaadbhuta, name of a fire .
. arjuna enumerated the names of shiva, kapardin, etc. .
mahadyuman, name of a tirtha or of the sun .
mahaagangaa, name of a tirtha. j by fasting and bathing in m. at the conjunction of the krittikaas and angaaraka one becomes cleansed of his sins and ascends to heaven, .
mahaagauri, a river .
mahaahanu1, a serpent .
mahaahanu2, a serpent .
mahaahrada1, one or more tirthas . g, . v, . m, .
mahaajaanu, a rishi .
mahaajavaa, name of two maatris. u, .
mahaajaya, a serpent. u, .
mahaakaasha, a varsha on shaakadvipa. b, .
mahaakaala1, name of a form of shiva . b, .
mahaakaala2, followers of shiva .
mahaakarni, the minister of king ambuvica .
mahaakarni, a maatri. u, .
mahaakaayaa, a maatri. u, .
mahaakraunca, a mountain in krauncadvipa . kraunca.
mahaalaya, a tirtha .
mahaamati, a daughter of angiras . aangirasi.
mahaamegha, a kuru warrior .
mahaamukha1, a warrior of jayadratha .
mahaanadi, one or more rivers .
mahaanadi, a river in shaakadvipa. b, .
mahaanandaa, a tirtha. u, .
mahaapadma1, an elephant .
mahaapadma2, a city. b, .
mahaapaarshva1, an asura .
mahaapaarishadeshvara, a warrior of skanda. u, .
mahaaprasthaanika . c, .
. janamejaya said having heard of the battle with iron clubs between the vrishnis and andhakas, and of krishnas ascension to heaven, what did the paandavas vaishampaayana said having heard the particulars of the great slaughter of the vrishnis, yudhishthira set his heart on leaving the world, saying to his brothers that it is time that ripens every creature, of which they approved. he made the king over to yuyutsu and installed parikshit as king in raastinapura, while vajra ruled in indraprastha. then he offered oblations of water to krishna, raama, and vasudeva, etc and shraaddhas to his deceased kinsmen, and fed vyaasa, naarada, maarkandeya, and yaajnavalkya, and gave jewels, etc. to brahmans in honour of krishna. kripa was installed as the preceptor of parikshit. then he summoned his subjects and informed them of his intentions they tried in vain to dissuade him. he and his brothers and draupadi removed their ornaments and wore barks of trees then they threw their sacred fires into the water. then they set out on their journey the five paandavas, draupadi, and a . kripa, etc stood around yuyutsu ulupi entered the waters of gangaa citraangada set out for manipura the grandmothers of parikshit surrounded him. yudhishthira, etc set out with their faces turned towards the east, devoting themselves to yoga, resolved to observe the religion of renunciation yudhishthira first, then the other paandavas in the order of their birth, behind them all draupadi a followed them. they reached the sea of red water. agni came, and mentioning the khaandava forest, etc he caused arjuna to throw the gaandiva and his inexhaustible quivers into the water to be given back to varuna. then agni disappeared. they now proceeded towards the south then, by the northern coast of the salt sea, to the south west then towards the west, where they saw dvaarakaa covered by the ocean then to the north, observant of yoga, desirous of making a round of the whole earth . they crossed himavat, and beheld a vast desert of sand, and then meru. krishnaa dropped n asked by bhimasena, yudhishthira said that this was the consequence of her partiality for arjuna. then sahadeva fell n asked by bhimasena, yudhishthira said it was because he never thought anybody his equal in wis. they went on. nakula fell asked by bhimasena, yudhishthira said it was because he thought that nobody equalled him in beauty, though his righteousness was without blemish. arjuna fell n asked by bhimasena, yudhishthira said that it was because arjuna had said that he would consume all the foes in a single but did not accomplish it. bhimasena fell n yudhishthira told him it was because he was a great eater, and used to boast of his strength. yudhishthira went on with the . indra came with a chariot, and asked yudhishthira to ascend it for going to heaven yudhishthira wanted to take draupadi and his fallen brothers with him indra said they have already reached heaven, where he will see them yudhishthira would have the to accompany him as indra said there is no place in heaven for persons with s, as the krodhavashas take away all the merits of such persons, yudhishthira refused to ascend the chariot. then dharma, said to yudhishthira that he had formerly tested him in the dvaitavana, where he had chosen the revival of nakula, disregarding bhimasena and arjuna, for ng good to his mother there is no one in heaven that is equal to thee. then dharma, indra, m a . ri causing yudhishthira to ascend the chariot, proceeded to heaven on their respective chariots. naarada said that yudhishthira was superior to all the r. ri. there. yudhishthira wished to proceed to where his brothers were indra, saying that his brothers had won regions of felicity, tried to persuade him to stay, beholding . ri. and si. yudhishthira wished to be united with his brothers and draupadi .
mahaapums, a varsha in shaakadvipa. b, .
mahaapura, a tirtha. k, .
mahaapuraanasambhaavya, an ancient king .
. b, . the names, alphabetically arranged, are the following abhagnaparisankhyaana, abhagnayoga, abhaasura, acala, aadideva, agni, agraahya, aahuti, aja, aakhandala, amadhya, amrita, amritaaksha, amriteshaya, anaadi, ananta, anantabhoga, anantagati, anantaakhya, aparaajita, aparimita, aparinin dita, aparinirmita, apratarkya, atharvashiras, atikricchra, avashavartin, avijneya, avyaktamadhya, avyaktanidhana, baandhava, bhaktavatsala, brahmaagrya, brahmakaayika, braahmanapriya, braahmana rupa, braahmanyadeva, brahmapurohita, brahmeshaya, brihat, cakshuraajya, candramas, caaturmahaaraajika, chinnasamshaya, chinna trishna, citrashikhandin, shrivaasa, dayaavaasa, devadevesha, deveshaya, dhanaprada, dishaam gaja, digbhaanu, dikpati, divaspati, ekaantadarshana, gataadhvara, guhya, hamsa, harihaya, harimedha, hayashiras, hiranmaya, hiran yeshaya, jagadanvaya, jagatpati, jagatprakriti, kaushika, kirtyaavaasa, kricchra, kshetrajna, kusheshaya, lakshmyaavaasa, lokasaakshin, mahaabhaasura, mahaahamsa, mahaa kricchra, mahaamaayaadhara, mahaamurti, mahaaniyama, mahaapavitra, mahaaprajaapati, mahaapurusha, mahaaraajika, maahaatmyasharira, mahaatushita, mahaavibhuti, mahaayajna, mahaa yajnabhaagahara, mahaayaamya, manas, maanasika, manaspati, marutpati, maasikavratadhara, naamanaamika, nirguna, nishkriya, nivrittabhrama, nivrittarupa, niyama, niyamadhara, omkaara, padmeshaya, pancaagni, pancakaala kartripati, pancamahaakalpa, pancaraatrika, pancayajna, paramahamsa, paramayaajnika, parasvaamin, parinirmita, pavitra, phenapaacaarya, pracinagarbha, pradhaana, praagjyotishajyeshtha, prajaanidhanakara, prajaapati, prajaasargakara, pramardana, prathamatri sauparna, pravacanagata, pravrittavedakriya, prishnigarbhapravritta, prithivipati, puro daashabhaagahara, puruhuta, purusha, purushot tama, purushtuta, purvanivaasa, ritadhaaman, sadasadvyaktaavyakta, salilapati, saamaga, samudraadhivaasa, sanaatana, sanjnaasanjna, saankhyamurti, saankhyayoga, saptamahaabhaaga, saarathi, sarvacchandaka, sarvadarshin, sarvagati, sarvakricchra, sarvatovritta, sarvaavaasa, shadanganidhaana, sukhaprada, suprajaapati, surya, susnaata, tapas, tapovaasa, triguna, trinaaciketa, tushita, urjaspati, vaacaspati, vashavartin, vadavaamukhogni, vaikhaanasa, vaikuntha, vaalakhilya, vanaspati, varaprada, varnadhara, vashatkaara, vaasudeva, vasu vrada, vishvakrit, vishvaksena, vishvamurti, vishvarupa, vishveshvara, vidigbhaanu, vidyaa vaasa, vrataavaasa, vyoman, yashovaasa, yajna, yajnabhaagahara, yajnagarbha, yajnahri daya, yajnasambhava, yajnastuta, yajnayoni, yama, yaamya, yugaadi, yugamadhya, yuganidhana .
mahaaratha1, an ancient king .
mahaaraudra, a raakshasa .
mahaasaras, a tirtha. b, . mahatsaras.
mahaasura, v. asura.
mahat1, a prince .
mahatsaras, a tirtha. m, . mahaasaras.
mahattara, a fire .
mahaujas1, one or more princes .
mahaujas, pl a people .
mahaavegaa, a maatri. u, .
mahaavira, a prince .
mahaayogeshvara, pl .
maheshvara3, a rudra .
maaheshvara, adj .
maaheshvarapada. a tirtha .
maaheshvarapura, a tirtha .
maaheshvari dhaaraa a tirtha .
mahendra2, a mountain, the abode of raama jaamadagnya . g, .
mahendraa, a river .
maahendra, adj. . u, .
. on the fourteenth day of the moon raama showed himself and was worshipped by the paandavas. raama praised them, and at his direction yudhishthira spent the night on mahendra, and then started for the south .
mahendravaani, a river .
mahettha, name of a country .
maaheya, pl a people .
mahi, foll .
mahi, a river .
mahidhara1, a king madadhaara.
mahidhara2, a tirtha .
maahika, pl a people .
mahisha, an asura . u, . g, . daanava.
maahishaka, pl a people .
mahishaananaa, a maatri. u, .
mahishmati, daughter of angiras .
maahishmati, a city . b agni had become enamoured of nilas daughter and would not blaze up till agitated by the breath of her lips one day when he enjoyed her love, disguised as a brahman, he was discovered by nila, who ordered the brahman to be punished according to the law, but as agni flamed up in wrath, the king bestowed his daughter upon him and was granted the boon that his army should have no fear from enemies, and from that time those monarchs who attacked nila were consumed by agni. the wives of m. were granted sexual liberty, and were not confined to a particular husband. from that time the monarchs avoid m. from fear of agni, . b, . b, .
mahitaa, a river .
mahodara1, a serpent .
mahodara2, an asura .
mahodara3, a son of dhritaraashtra .
mahodara4, a muni . k formerly raama lived in the forest of dandaka from desire of slaying raakshasas. in janasthaana he cut off the head of a raakshasa, which coursing at will fell upon the thigh of the brahman m. and piercing it, it stuck to it and remained there. m. in vain visited all the other tirthas and spoke to many rishis at last upon his having bathed in the tirtha aushanasa, the head of the raakshasa fell off and was lost in the waters. m with purified soul and all his sins washed away, returned to his hermitage the rishis on account of this event called the tirtha by the name of kapaalamocana. the great rishi m repairing once more to that tirtha, drank its water and was crowned with great ascetic success, .
mahodaya, a prince .
mahopamaa, a river .
mahopanishad or mahopanishada, .
mahoraga, mostly pl devaasura maasg. ivaasurasura maasg i.e. ashvasenayaksha maisiddha maarishi maahdaityaa sura maatrailokye...sa kinnara mesa kinnara maasarshi maasamaa kulamsg i.e. ananta
mahotsaha1, an ancient king .
mahyuttara, pl a people .
mainaaka1, a mountain. b, . y, .
mainaaka2, a mountain in krauncadvipa .
mainda, a monkey king .
maireyaka, pl name of a caste, .
maitra, adj. . b
maitra, said of brahmans, .
maitraayana, . hopkins, great epic, p. .
maitreya1, one or more rishis . b, .
. b bhishma said once vyaasa, while wandering in disguise, waited at vaaraanasi upon maitreya in the house of a loose woman, and was fed by him with excellent food. as he smiled, maitreya said that he did not see much difference between one that behaved as an ordinary person, between one who is unemancipated and one who is emancipated, especially when was distinguished by birth . vyaasa said that he wondered that the vedas should contain an untruth for even a small gift produces great results, and maitreya had, by feeding vyaasa, conquered many high regions of felicity, as one s by great sacrifices. gift is more auspicious than all sacred acts . maitreya, approving of the words of vyaasa, praised the brahmans as the root of righteousness if the brahman be gratified, . and p. also are gratified, referring to ri. . vyaasa, saying that even the most atrocious sins are washed off by penances, recommended to him the duties of householders .
. . vyaasa said that the rishi maitreya would ad monish duryodhana. maitreya came, having on a tirthayaatraa arrived at kurujaangala, and having visited yudhishthira in the kaamyaka wood. as maitreya advised duryodhana to make peace with the paandavas now that bhima had slain kirmira, etc duryodhana gave him a slight by slapping his thigh and scratching the ground with his foot. therefore maitreya cursed him, saying that bhima should smash that thigh of his with his mace this curse, however, should not take effect if he made peace with the paandavas. dhritaraashtra wished to hear about the death of kirmira, but maitreya would not speak again to him, because his words were not regarded by duryodhana saying that vidura would relate it to him, he went away. duryodhana went out perturbed.
maitri . b, .
majjala, a warrior of skanda. u, .
majjaana, v. majjala.
maakandi, a region in the country of the paancaalas .
maakandi, a city .
makara2, a vyuha, .
makari, a river .
maala, pl a people .
maalaa, a river .
malada, pl a people .
malaja, pl a people .
maalatikaa, a maatri. u, .
maalava, pl a people .
maalava1 . the two next.
maalavaa, a river .
maalavaanaka, pl a people .
maalavi, wife of the madra king ashvapati .
malaya1, a mountain . d, . b, .
malaya2, a mountain in shaakadvipa. b, . jalada.
malaya3, a suparna, son of garuda .
malaya, pl a people .
maalaya, v. malaya3.
malayadhvaja, name of a paandya king . paandya.
maalini, a river .
maalini, one of the mothers of shishu .
maalini, a raakshasi .
maalini, a goddess .
maalini, a city .
malla, pl a people . mallaraashtra.
malla, pl foll .
mallaraashtra . malla, pl.
mallava, pl a people .
maalyapindaka, a serpent .
maalyavat, one or more mountains . j on the summit of m. is always seen the fire called samvartaka, which blazes forth at the end of the yuga for the destruction of the universe. on the summit of m. towards the east there are many small mountains m. measures, yojanas. the men there are of the complexion of gold they have fallen from the brahmaloka and are good, and given to severe ascetic austerities and sexual abstinence in order to protect the creatures they enter the sun heated with the suns rays for, years, they then enter the lunar disc, . g, .
mamataa, the wife of utathya .
maamsa, name of a caste, .
maanada1, son of dhrishtadyumna .
maanasa1, name of two serpents .
maanasa2, a sacred lake, the present manasarovara . b, . b, sarogataam nalinimsaravasishthasara, only b c. has vaikhaanasammm
maanasa3, a mountain .
maanasa4, a name of the primeval being. b, .
maanasa, adj. . b, . b
maanasa, pl. . b, .
maanasa tirtha. m, . maanasa2.
maanasa tirtha, .
manasyu, a prince .
maanava, pl. .
maanava, adj. . b, .
maanavarjaka, pl a people .
maanavi, v. maalavi.
maanavi, a river .
mandaga, pl. . b, .
mandagaa, a river .
mandaka, pl a people .
mandaakini, name of more rivers . b, . m, . d gautama said the blessed m. of king vaishravana is accessible to those who are devoted to enjoyments pleasing to gandharvas, yakshas, and apsarases. dhritaraashtra said those who regard hospitality as a vow, who are observant of good vows, who give shelter to brahmans, and who feed on remnants, an the m .
mandala, name of a vyuha, .
mandalaka, a serpent .
mandapaala, a rishi . viprarshi.
mandara1, a mountain . b m. is the refuge of heaven seeking munis by its grace brahmans, kshatriyas, and vaishyas attain to heaven there many tirthas are seen, and there arjuna had lived happily it resounds with notes of apsarases and the chanting of the vedas, . c on m. lives the yaksha maanivara and the yaksha king kubera and, gandharvas, and four times as many kimpurushas and yakshas surround the yakshendra maanibhadra, . b m. is the dwelling place of the celestial rishis, . f, . c, . d, . b, . parvataraajan.
mandara2, v. mandaara.
mandaara, son of hiranyakashipu. c m. succeeded, through the boon he had obtained from shiva, in fighting indra for a million of years neither the thunderbolt of indra nor the discus of vishnu could make the slightest impression in his body, .
mandavaahini, a river .
maandavya, a rishi . animaandavya.
maandhaatri, an ancient king, son of yuvanaashva . king m. yauvanaashva vanquished the gods, the asuras, and men the ashvins took him out from his fathers womb by a surgical operation, as yuvanaashva, when a hunting, had drunk the sacrificial butter from a sacrifice and become quick with child. then indra let him suck milk from his fingers in twelve days he became cubits in stature. he conquered the whole earth and vanquished the kings janamejaya, etc in a single day all the lands lying between the mountain where the sun rises and the mountain where he sets are known to this day as the inions of m. having performed a hundred horse sacrifices and a hundred raajasuyas, he gave to the brahmans some rohita fishes of gold, yojanas in length and yojana in breadth. the gods, the asuras, men, the yakshas, the gandharvas, the uragas, the birds, the brahmans, and the rishis came to his sacrifices. at last he repaired to the regions of the righteous, . b, . b, . g, . the following synonyms yauvanaashva, . yauvanaashvi, .
. questioned by yudhishthira, lomasha said king yuvanaashva saudyumni, of ikshvaakus race, performed besides other sacrifices, horse sacrifices. as he had no sons, he made over the duties of the state to his ministers, and retired to the woods. having once observed a fast, he entered the hermitage of bhrigu, while the great rishis were asleep, and drank a jar of water, which the son of bhrigu, after having performed severe austerities, had destined to be drunk by yuvanaashvas queen in order that she should bear him a son, who by his bravery might send even indra to the abode of yama. a sacrifice was then performed for him after years a son pierced yuvanaashvas left side . indra came, and put the boys forefinger into his mouth, saying me he shall suck . thereby maandhaatri became very strong, and grew cubits, and acquired the whole of the vedas including the dhanurveda by his thought alone, and on the same day he obtained the bow aajagava and a number of shafts made of horn, and an impenetrable coat of mail. he was placed on the throne by indra himself, and conquered the three worlds in a righteous way the gems of their own accord came into his possession, and he performed a number of sacrifices with abundant gratuities, and sat at indras side. his sacrificial grounds were to be found all over the earth, and he is said to have given away to the brahmans, padmas of kine. after twelve years drought he caused rain to come n, paying no heed to indra. he slew the gaandhaara king of the lunar dynasty. here, in the midst of kurukshetra, is the spot where he sacrificed to the gods .
mandika, pl a people .
manari, wife of raavana .
manari, a maatri. u, .
manduka1, pl .
manduka2, pl a kind of horse, .
manga, pl a people, .
mani1, a rishi .
mani2, a serpent .
mani3, a companion of skanda. u, .
manibhadra, a yaksha . c, . b, . yaksharaaj, yakshendra.
manibhadraka, pl a people .
manibiddha, v. manividdha.
manijalaa, a river in shaakadvipa. b, .
manika, a serpent อด, .
manikaancana, a varsha in shaakadvipa. b, .
manikuttikaa, a maatri. u, .
manimantha, a mountain .
manimat1, a yaksha or raakshasa . raakshasa, raaksha saadhipati.
manimat2, one or more kings .
manimat3, a serpent .
manimat4, a rishi .
manimat5, a tirtha .
manimat6, a mountain .
manimati, a city.
maninaaga1, a serpent .
maninaaga2, a tirtha .
maningaa, a river .
manipura, the capital of citravaahana .
manipushpaka, the conch of sahadeva .
maniskandha, a serpent .
maanivara, a yaksha. c, .
manjulaa, a river .
mankanaka1, v. macakruka.
mankanaka2, a rishi. at the tirtha saptasaarasvata the great rishi m. became perfect, so that when he had cut his hand with the pointed blade of a kusha grass, there flew from his wound vegetable juice, at which he began to dance, and the animate and inanimate creation also began to dance together with him. then the gods, headed by brahman and the rishis, asked mahaadeva to prevent him from dancing. the god then in the presence of m. pressed his thumb with the tip of his own finger, and from the wound there came ashes, white as snow. then m. became ashamed and aed rudra, saying that he was the refuge of the world, including the gods and the asuras, that he had created the three worlds, and swallows everything at the end of the yuga, that he cannot be fathomed by the gods themselves, that all the gods headed by brahmaan are to be seen in him, etc. at his request shiva said to the brahmarshi that his asceticism should through the grace of shiva increase a thousandfold, that he would dwell with him in the aashrama, and that those who bathe in sapta saarasvata and worship shiva should be able to obtain everything here and hereafter, and go to the saarasvata loka then mahaadeva disappeared, . j m. had from his youth led the life of a brahma caarin. once, when performing his ablutions in the river sarasvati, he beheld a woman bathing in the river at this sight his seed dropped and fell into the sarasvati he took it up and placed it in his earthen pot then it became divided into seven parts, whence were born seven rishis vaayuvega, etc who were the progenitors of the maruts. m. was the son of maatarishvan and sukanyaa, . brahmarshi.
manki, name of a man .
manmathakara, a warrior of skanda. u, .
manojava1, son of the vasu anila and shivaa .
manojava2, a tirtha .
manojavaa, a maatri. u, .
manonuga, a region in krauncadvipa .
manoramaa, an apsaras .
manoramaa, a river, one of the seven sarasvatis. i, .
manovirudh, pl a class of gods .
mantharaa, the maid of kaikeyi .
manthini, a maatr. u, .
manu1, father of the human race, one or more prajaapatis bis . c, . b, . f, . u, . b, . b, married ten daughters of dakshashanaishcara suryaputro bhavishyati mu aadiganapurvaka, sc. vyaasaaanushaasanik.shiva identified with m.o...gatim, i.e. shivashiva identified with m.tam dharmam mr abravit, quotationr evam prashamsati, quotationstriya pumsaam paridade mr jigamishur divamunaabhihitam shaastramo shrutvaanushaasanam, quotationr abravit, quota tionity abravid m, quotationdharmam tam m praaha dharmavit, quotationr abravit, quotationkrishna vaasudevaor vamshe, father of angaaanushaasanik.prajaapati
manu2, caakshusha .
manu3, praacetasa .
manu4, saavarna .
manu5, svaarocisha. b, svaarocisham, learnt the religion of naaraayana from brahmaan, and imparted the knowledge of it to his son shankhapada
manu6, svaayambhuva . c, . b, . svaayambhuva.
manu9, name of a fire .
manu1, a daughter of praadhaa and kashyapa .
manu, pl. . b, . g, .
manuputra, pl. . b, .
maanusha, a tirtha .
. . the six divorced wives of the rishis, together with vinataa, obtained permission from skanda to become his mothers. at the request of indra the krittikaas are placed among the nakshatras instead of abhijit, the younger sister of rohini, who from jealousy had repaired to the woods. brahmaan ordered that time should be reckoned from dhanishthaa, while it had formerly been reckoned from rohini . then mothers asked skanda that they might become the mothers of the worlds instead of the old mothers and devour the progeny of those old mothers, because they had slandered them before their husbands, and always dwell with skanda. skanda granted that until the age of years they should have the power of afflicting the human kind, and he loosed from his body his raudra nature, under the name of skandaapasmaara, that they might dwell with him. enumeration of several grahas, among others the male and female children of skanda they are all named skandagrahas they are propitiated with offerings, ablutions, unguents, etc and particularly by the worship of skanda and when they are propitiated they bestow good on men. then are mentioned the grahas, that afflict men from the to the year after the year fever takes the place of the grahas. these evil spirits always avoid those who have subdued their senses, etc and those who are devoted to maheshvara .
manyanti, a fire .
manyu, name of a fire .
manyumat, a fire.
maardamarshi, v. maargamarshi.
maargashirsha, name of a month .
maargashirshi, the day of full moon in the month of maargashirshatirthayaatraap.yaam atitaayaam pushyena prayayu, sc. the paandavas on their tirthayaatraaraajadh.caitryaam vaa myaam vaa senaayoga prashasyate
maargamarshi, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
maarganapriyaa, one of the daughters of pradhaa .
maarica1, a raakshasa, friend of raavana . b from fear of raama m. ated an ascetic mode of life, . raksha
marici1, a rishi, son of brahmaan and father of kashyapa . c, . c, . u, . b, . c, . b, . g, . b, .
marici2, an apsaras .
maricipa, pl a kind of rishis . b, . u, . e, .
maarisha, pl a people .
maarishaa, a river .
maarjaara mushika samvaada . b there was a large banyan in the midst of a forest, with various kinds of birds, etc. a wise mouse, palita, lived at the foot of that tree, having made a hole there with outlets. on the branches lived a cat lomasha. a caandaala came and built a hut, setting his traps of leather strings every evening after sunset. one day he caught the cat. palita began to eat the flesh in the trap, but beheld the mongoose harito and the owl candraka. he resolved upon saving the cat though an enemy, in order to escape from them having made peace with the cat, he crouched beneath it the mongoose and owl left the spot the mouse began to cut the strings slowly, notwithstanding the cats impatience. at morning the caandaala parigha appeared, accompanied by a pack of s. then the mouse quickly cut the remaining string the cat got upon the banyan, palita entered his hole. the hunter took up his net and left the spot. palita would not conclude friendship with the cat, and entered another hole.
maarkandeya, a brahmarshi . b, . bhaargava, bhaargavasattama, bhrigukulashreshtha, bhrigu nandana, brahmarshi, viprarshi.
. when the paandavas were dwelling at that very place, there set in the season of the rains . then in the autumn they spent the holiest night, that of the full moon in the month of kaarttika, on the sarasvati with the ascetics. as soon as the dark fortnight set in, they with their charioteers and cooks entered the kaamyaka forest . in the kaamyaka wood many brahmans came to them, and one of them said that krishna and maarkandeya would come to see them. immediately krishna arrived with satyabhaamaa on his chariot that was yoked with shaibya and sugriva. he told krishnaa that her sons, though her father and brothers proffered them a king and territories, found no joy in the house of drupada, but that in the town of the vrishnis they were directed by subhadraa and received instruction from raukmineya even as aniruddha, abhimanyu, sunitha, and bhaanu, and were instructed by the young abhimanyu in the use of arms. then he suggested to yudhishthira with the dashaarhas, kukuras, and andhakas, to kill duryodhana, etc. yudhishthira said they would stand by their promise, and after the thirteen years take refuge in krishna. while they were thus talking, the brahmarshi maarkandeya appeared. when they had taken their seats, the devarshi naarada also came to visit them. yudhishthira, mentioning the happiness of the impious dhaartaraashtras, asked maarkandeya about the results of mens acts. maarkan deya, after having described the krita age and the subsequent deterioration, answered the question . braahmanamaahaatmya kathana . sarasvati taarkshya samvaada . vaivasvatopaakhyaana . yudhishthira, saying that maarkandeya alone worships brahmaan at the time of the great dissolution, when he sleeps in a lotus flower, and when he awakes to recreate the world, asked him to explain the causes of things. maarkandeya said janaardana attired in yellow robes is the great creator of everything. after the dissolution, creation again comes to life. krita yuga =, years dawn years eve years tretaa yuga =, dvaapara yuga =, kali yuga =, altogether a cycle of yugas =, years. after the kali yuga is over, the krita yuga comes again. one thousand cycles constitute a day of brahmaan. description of kali yuga . then comes a long drought, and seven suns drink up all water and reduce wood and grass to ashes. then the samvartaka fire with wind penetrates into rasaatala and terrifies the gods, daanavas, and yakshas, and consumes this world with gods, asuras, gandharvas, yakshas, uragas, and raakshasas. and there rise in the sky deep masses of clouds flooding the entire surface of the earth and showering incessantly for twelve years. then svayambhu, dwelling in the lotus, drinks this terrible wind and goes to sleep. when all has become water, alone wander in affliction and become fatigued, and find no resting place. then behold a vast banyan tree, and on a couch attached to a bough of that tree a fair boy with yellow robes, with the mark of shrivatsa. he caused me to enter his body through the mouth, and then beheld the whole earth with cities and kings, gangaa, shatadru, etc gods, saadhyas, rudras, aadityas, etc at last was suddenly projected through his open mouth by a gust of wind. within that very moment acquired a new sight and beheld myself emancipated . wished to know his self. then he spoke to me the gods even not know me truly. am naaraayana, the eternal and unchangeable source of all things, the creator and destroyer of all am vishnu, brahmaan, shakra, etc. in the form of shesha support this earth, in the form of a boar raised it when sunk in water am the vadavaavaktra fire from my mouth, arms, thighs, and feet sprang brahmans, kshatriyas, vaishyas, and shudras from me spring the rig saama, yajur, and atharva veda am the samvartaka fire, the samvartaka wind, the samvartaka sun, and the samvartaka fire the stars are the pores of my skin, etc. when virtue and morality decrease, create myself into new forms in the krita age become white, etc. . when the end comes, alone in the form of kaala destroy the three worlds, etc. the grandsire of all creatures is half of my body. am the bearer of the conch shell, the discus, and the mace. for a period of, cycles of yugas sleep, overwhelming all creatures in insensibility, and stay here, in the form of a boy though am old, until brahmaan wakes up under the form of brahmaan have repeatedly granted thee boons when brahmaan awakes, will then alone create all creatures. then he disappeared, and beheld this creation start into life. and that deity is krishna, thy relative. in consequence of the boon granted by him memory s not fail me, my life is long, and death is under my control . then all bowed n unto janaardana, who comforted them . yudhishthira asked him about the future cause of the government of the earth. maarkandeya, having given a short description of the other yugas, described in detail the kali yuga in the new krita yuga, kalkin will arise. then maarkandeya gave yudhishthira some moral precepts and exhortations . vaamadevacarita . baka shakra samvaada . shibi . naahusha carita on the same topic there were two learned and able kings, vrishadarbha and seduka. seduka knew that vrisha darbha had from his boyhood an unuttered vow, that he would give no other metal to brahmans than gold and silver. he once sent a brahman, who asked him for, horses for his preceptor, to vrishadarbha, who whipped him and then gave him a days tribute, because he had whipped him . shibi . raajanyamahaabhaagya . indradyumnopaakhyaana . asked by yudhishthira in what condition a man should practise charity, maarkandeya enumerated four kinds of futile life and sixteen kinds of futile charity. the brahmans save others and themselves by japa, mantra, and homa. he next enume rated the brahmans that should be excluded from shraaddhas, and gave other moral precepts then he enumerated the persons to whom one should make gifts the effects of various gifts to brahmans . yamaloka . precepts about gifts, washing the feet of brahmans, etc. blessing upon the reader. three kinds of purity by aing sandhyaa and reciting gaayatri one is protected against sin and evil results from gifts, against inauspicious stars, and against raakshasas. greatness of the brahmans. the carrying of three staves, etc are useless if the heart be not pure. they who not commit sin in manas, word, deed, and buddhi really practise austerities . on the effects of various gifts at various times . having heard the history of indradyumna, yudhishthira, saying that maarkandeya knew the gods, daanavas, raakshasas, the royal genealogies and the genealogies of the rishis, and gandharvas, yakshas, kinnaras, and apsarases, asked him about kuva laashva ikshvaaku. maarkandeya related dhundhumaaropaakhyaana . pativratopaakhyaana . angirasa . skanpatti . skanda shakra samaagama . skanaakhyaana . manushyagrahakathana . skandayuddha . kaarttikeyastava .
maarttikaavata1, a country .
maarttikaavata2, pl a people .
maarttikaavata3, adj .
maarttikaavataka, adj .
maarttikaavatika, adj .
maru, v. muru.
marubhumi, a country .
marudgana, name of a tirtha. q by bathing in the tirtha m in the retreat of the pitris, and in the tirtha of vaivasvata one becomes cleansed. by bathing in the tirtha brahmasaras on the bhaagiraathi one attains to the region of soma, .
maarudha, a country .
marukaccha, v. bharukaccha.
marut, pl a class of gods, followers of indra . bis, . b, . c, . d, . j, . u, . x, . ee, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . b, . b, . f, . g
maruta, a prince .
maaruta, adj. .
maaruta1, pl. . b, . marut, pl.
maaruta2, pl the warriors of the gods .
maaruta3, pl a people .
maarutaashana, a warrior of skanda. u, .
maarutantavya, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
marutta, an ancient king, son of avikshit bis m the son of avikshit, in order to compete with brihaspati, caused samvarta to officiate at his sacrifice. shiva had given him wealth. the sacrifice took place on the golden base of himavat the gods with indra and brihaspati used to come to him the maruts used to become distributors of food in his palace the vishvedevas were his courtiers the gods yielded copious showers of rain he gratified the rishis, the pitris, and the gods, he reigned for, years, and then repaired to the eternal regions of bliss acquired by his merits, . b, . b, . b, . aavikshita, maruta.
marutvat, pl a class of gods . marut, pl.
maryaadaa, a vidarbha princess .
maryaadaa, a videha princess .
maasa, pl .
masira, pl a people .
maatali, the charioteer of indra . the following synonyms shakrasaarathi, . devasaarathi, .
maataliya, adj. .
. . the holy rishi kanva said to duryodhana in the assembly of the kurus brahmaan, the grandsire of the universe, is indestructible and eternal. the holy rishis nara and naaraayana are of the same character. of all the sons of aditi, vishnu alone is eternal...in this connection is cited an old story maatali, the charioteer of indra, had, by his wife sudharmaa, one beautiful daughter, gunakeshi. as he found no suitable husband for her amongst dai g or men and ri maatali set out for the naagaloka . on the way naarada, proceeding to visit varuna, followed maatali, and first showed him the abode of varuna, surrounded by his sons and grandsons. varunas son pushkara had been chosen as husband by somas daughter jyotsnaakaali . he then showed him the abode, entirely made of gold, of the liquor to the possession of that liquor the gods owe their being suraa. he showed him also the weapons that had belonged to the daityas and had been obtained by the gods as a booty of war when hurled at the foe they always return into the hand that hurls them. here dwelt in days of yore many tribes of raa. and dai. here is that fire of blazing flames and the discus of vishnu and that knotty bow that was created for the destruction of the world it is always protected with great vigilance by the gods, and it is from this bow that the one wielded by arjuna has taken its name it is endued with the strength of, bows it punishes all wicked kings it was first created by brahmaan and praised by shukra it is held by the sons of the lord of waters. he showed him also varunas umbrella in the umbrella house, always dropping water that cannot be seen. innumerable are the wonders to be seen here . in the very centre of the naagaloka is the city paataala with daityas and daanavas, the asura fire, fed by water here the gods, having first vanquished their foes, quaffed the amrita and deposited the residue the aaditya hayashiras from here airaavata takes up water in order to impart it to the clouds, and it is that water which indra pours n as rain aquatic animals, the timi, etc which subsist on the rays of the moon here mahaadeva practised ascetic austerities for the benefit of all creatures maharshis addicted to the vow of go here in the race of the celebrated elephant supratika were born the elephants airaavana, vaamana, kumuda, and anjana an egg in the waters from the commencement of the creation, whence, when the end of the world comes, a fire bursts forth and consumes the three worlds, etc. maatali said no one here seems to be eligible . in paataala is hiranyapura, built by the daanava maya, belonging to the daityas and daanavas, who in days of yore lived here having obtained boons, exhibiting, different kinds of illusion, incapable of being vanquished by shakra, yama, varuna, or kubera, etc. the kaalakhanjas and the yaatudhaanas the nivaatakavacas many times, o maatali thou with thy son gomukha and indra hadst to retreat before them description of their abodes . maatali would not choose a son in law among the daanavas, the enemies of the gods as regards thyself, know that thy heart is ever set on fomenting quarrels . then the world of the suparnas, who subsist on snakes and have sprung from the six sons of garuda sumukha, etc of kashyapas and vinataas race, aned with the shrivatsa, belonging to the kshatriya order, for they never attain to brahmanhood in consequence of their preying upon their kinsmen they are shown favour by vishnu, and ae vishnu. the names of the principal are suvarnacuda, etc. . rasaatala is the seventh stratum below the earth here dwells surabhi, the mother of kine, born of the amrita her milk springs from the essence of the six different kinds of tastes she sprang of old from the mouth of brahmaan, who was gratified with drinking the amrita and vomited the best of things . a jet of her milk created the milky ocean, covered with white foam that is the food of the ascetics phenapaa the very gods fear them because of their austerities. from surabhi are born the four kine that support the quarters in the east surupaa, in the south hamsikaa, in the west subhadraa, in the north sarvakaamadughaa. the gods and the asuras, making mandara their pole, churned the ocean, and obtained vaaruni, lakshmi, amrita, uccaishravas, and kaustubha. surabhi milks sudhaa to those who live on sudhaa, svadhaa to those who live on svadhaa, and amrita to those who live on amrita . the gaathaa that was sung by the dwellers of rasaatala in days of old is still heard to be recited in the world by persons of learning neither in the naaga loka, nor in svarga, nor in a vimaana, nor in heaven is residence so happy as in rasaatala . the city of bhogavati resembles indras city amaraavati it is ruled over by vaasuki, the king of the naagas here dwells shesha here dwell the innumerable naagas, the sons of surasaa, wearing svastika, etc. the principal are vaasuki, etc. . maatali wished to get for his son in law the naaga sumukha of airaavatas race, the son of cikura, and the grandson of aaryaka kauravya and the daughters son of vaamana . naarada introduced maatali to aaryaka as the friend and charioteer of indra, who drives his chariot drawn by, steeds, and thereby has vanquished the enemies of the gods. aaryaka objected that garuda, who had slain cikura, when he left these regions had said that after a month he would devour sumukha also. according to a proposal of maatali, they all visited indra and vishnu vishnu proposed to give amrita to sumukha but indra disagreed on account of the prowess of garuda instead he gave him an excellent lease of life, and having married maatalis daughter he returned home . garuda made remonstrances to indra, saying that he, like him, can without any fatigue bear the weight of the three worlds that he had slain the daityas shrutashri, etc. that he not only perches on vishnus flagstaff, but sometimes carries him with all his friends on his back, and he can carry vishnu without fatigue on only one of his feathers. vishnu shows him that he cannot bear the weight of his one right arm then he threw sumukha with the toe of his foot upon garudas breast. and from that time garuda has ever lived with that snake. kanva continued in the same way, o duryodhana thou canst not encounter bhima, etc. . duryodhana, fixing his eyes on karna, burst into laughter, saying am precisely what the creator has made me .
matanga1, an ancient king . the story of satyavrata in harivamsha .
matanga2, one or more rishis .
maatanga, a rishi .
maatanga, pl. .
maatanga, name of a caste, ff. .
matangavaapi, a tirtha .
maatangi, daughter of krodhavashaa, mother of the elephants .
maatarishvan2, a suparna, son of garuda .
maathara, a follower of surya . b, .
maathara, pl v. raamatha, pl.
mathuraa, a city, the present muthra . b, .
maathuradeshya, adj. .
mati1, a goddess .
matimat1, a king .
matinaara, an ancient king . anaadhrishtisuta.
matkulikaa, v. matkunikaa.
matkunikaa, a maatri. u, .
maatraa, pl. = shiva .
maatri, pl .
maatritirtha, a tirtha .
matsa, v. matsya2.
matsya1, a king, son of vasu uparicara. when girikaas season came, the pitris of vasu asked him to slay deer when he in the forest was longing for girikaa, he gave his semen, enveloped by an ashoka leaf, to a hawk in order that it should be carried to girikaa persecuted by another hawk, the hawk let the semen fall into the yamunaa, where it was swallowed by the apsaras adrikaa, who had by the curse of a brahman been transformed into a fish. in the tenth month the fish was caught, and out of its womb came a boy, who was given to uparicara and afterwards became the king matsya, and a girl, satyavati, who was of a fishy smell, and was retained by the fisherman. when killed, adrikaa assumed her own celestial shape and went away to the regions of the siddhas, the rishis, and the caaranas, . next.
matsya4, the country of the matsyas .
matsya1, pl a people .
matsya2, pl. .
maatsya2, a rishi .
maatsyaka, adj. .
mattamayuraka, pl a people .
maudaakin, v. modaakin.
maudgalya, one or more rishis .
maudgalya, adj said of a caste, .
mauleya, pl a people .
mauneya, pl a family of deva gandharvas .
maunjaayana, a muni .
maurava, adj. . b, . f, . muru.
. vaisham paayana said when the year was reached, yudhishthira beheld many unusual portents . a little while afterwards he heard of the wholesale carnage of the vrishnis in a battle with clubs, where only krishna and raama had escaped with life he summoned his brothers and took counsel with them they were filled with grief the death of krishna they could not believe. janamejaya inquired about the particulars of the destruction of the vrishnis and andhakas. vaishampaayana said when the year.... asked by janamejaya, cursed by whom the vrishnis, etc met with destruction, vaishampaayana said saarana, etc saw vishvaamitra, kanva, and naarada arrived at dvaarakaa they disguised shaamba as a woman, calling her the wife of babhru, and asked the ascetics what this one would bring forth. the ascetics answered this shaamba will bring forth a terrible iron club for the destruction of the vrishnis and andhakas, except raama and krishna . then they went to krishna. informed of what had taken place, krishna summoned all the vrishnis and told them of it, but did not try to annul the curse. the next day shaamba actually brought forth an iron club. the fact was reported to the king, who caused it to be reduced into powder and thrown into the sea. at the command of aahuka, etc the manufacture of spirits was forbidden among all the vrishnis and andhakas, under the penance of being impaled alive with all ones kinsmen. all the citizens bound themselves by the rule . time every day wandered about their houses, like a man of terrible and fierce aspect, bald head, black and tawny of complexion they shot innumerable arrows at him, without being able to pierce him. also other dreadful portents of calamity were daily seen by the vrishnis throughout the city . they showed disregard for brahmans, p and etc except raama and krishna, etc. when the paanca janya was blown in their houses, asses brayed aloud from every direction. krishna, seeing that the day of the new moon coincided with the lunation, summoned the yaadavas and said the lunation has been made the by raahu once more, as at the time of the great battle of the bharatas . he understood that the year had come according to the curse of gaandhaari, and that the omens were similar to those which yudhishthira had noticed when the two armies were arrayed in order of battle. he endeavoured to bring about those occurrences which would make gaandhaaris words true. he commanded the vrishnis to make a pilgrimage to some sacred water, and caused the messengers to proclaim a journey to the sea coast . at that time the vrishni ladies dreamt every night that a black woman with white teeth, entering their abodes, laughed aloud and ran through dvaarakaa stealing the men dreamt of vultures that devoured the vrishnis and andhakas in the houses and fire chambers their ornaments, etc were taken away by raa. the iron discus of krishna, given by agni, with a nave of adamant, ascended to heaven. krishnas chariot was dragged away by his four steeds over the ocean krishnas and baladevas standards, which were reverently worshipped by those two heroes, were taken away by aps who day and night called upon the vrishnis and andhakas to set out on a pilgrimage to some sacred water. they prepared various kinds of edibles and spirits, and set out to prabhaasa. uddhava took leave of them and krishna before departing . the vrishnis, mixing with spirits the food that had been cooked for the brahmans, gave it to apes, and began revels with drinking, so also raama, etc. yuyu dhaana blamed kritavarman for the nightly slaughter, and was applauded by pradyumna, but was rebuked by kritavarman with having killed bhurishravas while sitting in praaya krishna cast an angry glance, and saatyaki informed him of the story of the gem syamantaka, which was satraajits satyabhaamaa, weeping, approached krishna, and sitting on his lap enhanced his anger saatyaki swore that he would cause kritavarman to follow the five sons of draupadi, etc, whom he had slain with the help of ashvatthaaman, and he severed his head in the very sight of krishna, and began to strike n others krishna rushed forward to prevent him from ng further mischief, and the bhojas and andhakas all assailed him krishna did not interfere they struck yuyudhaana with the pots from which they had been eating pradyumna rushed forward to rescue yuyudhaana they were both slain. krishna in wrath took up a handful of erakaa grass, which became a terrible iron club, with which krishna slew all that came before him. the andhakas, etc also took up blades of the erakaa grass, which were converted into iron clubs, and struck one another in consequence of the curse of the brahmans son killed father and vice versa, inebriated with spirits. beholding that shaamba, etc were slain, krishna exterminated the vrishnis and the andhakas. babhru and daaruka told him now to go to raama . daaruka, krishna, and babhru, seeking raama, saw him sitting thoughtfully, reclining his back against a tree. krishna sent daaruka to inform arjuna and tell him to come quickly, and he also dispatched babhru to protect the ladies against robbers but as soon as babhru had proceeded to a distance, an iron club attached to the mallet of a hunter came and slew him. krishna then, entering dvaaravati, told his father to protect the ladies till arjuna came, saying that he would practise penances with raama. when he came to raama, the latter had applied himself to yoga, and from his mouth issued a huge white naaga with, heads and red eyes, who proceeded to the ocean, and was received by the ocean and many celestial snakes karkotaka, etc. . after raamas death krishna wandered for some time, and then sat n, thinking of gaandhaari and durvaasas, and the destruction of the vrishnis, andhakas, and kurus, whence he concluded that the hour had come he then restrained his senses though he was the supreme deity, he wished to die in order to dispel all bts, etc and to make the words of durvaasas true. the hunter jaraa, mistaking krishna for a deer, pierced him at the heel with an arrow coming up, he beheld a man dressed in yellow robes, rapt in yoga, with many arms he became filled with fear krishna comforted him and then ascended upwards, and was received in heaven by indra, etc. . meanwhile daaruka came and informed the paandavas of the slaughter of the vrishnis, etc. . arjuna with daaruka proceeded to dvaarakaa when krishnas, wives saw arjuna, they uttered a loud cry the city seemed to arjuna to be the fierce river vaitarani arjuna, satyaa, and rukmini fell n and wailed then praising krishna and comforting the ladies, arjuna went to vasudeva, whom he found lying on the ground and burning with grief vasudeva lamented and said he would die by abstaining from food . arjuna said that the hour had come for the paandavas also for departing he would, however, first remove to indraprastha the women, the children, and the aged of the vrishnis. saying to daaruka that he wished to see the chief officers of the vrishnis, arjuna entered the hall of the yaadavas called sudharmaa, where he said to the citizens and ministers that he would take away with him the remnants of the vrishnis and andhakas, as the sea would soon engulf the city vajra would be their king at indraprastha they would set out on the seventh day at sunrise. arjuna passed that night in the mansion of krishna. at dawn vasudeva by yoga attained to the highest goal the ladies were in despair. his four wives, devaki, bhadraa, rohini, and madiraa, ascended the funeral pyre, and attained to the regions of vasudeva. when arjuna had caused vasudeva and his four wives to be burnt, the boys and the ladies offered oblations of water to vasudeva. then arjuna visited the spot where the vrishnis had been killed and caused the last rites to be performed, and caused raama and krishna to be cremated. on the seventh day he set out, mounting his chariot, with the ladies and children, the yaadava troops, and other inhabitants, with krishnas, wives and vajra they numbered many millions in all. then the ocean flooded dvaarakaa. they proceeded in slow marches. when they had planted their encampment at pancanada, the aabhiras conspired to rob the cavalcade. arjuna succeeded only with great difficulty in stringing his bow his celestial weapons would not come to his mind the vrishni warriors failed to rescue the women, who were snatched away by the robbers arjunas shafts soon became exhausted formerly they had been inexhaustible. arjuna became very cheerless he escorted the remnant of the cavalcade to kurukshetra he established the son of kritavarman in the city of maarttikaavata with the remnant of the women of the bhoja king the remainder, with children and old men and women, at indraprastha, with vajra as their ruler the son of yuyudhaana on the banks of the sarasvati the wis of akrura, notwithstanding the entreaties of vajra, entered the woods rukmini, etc ascended the funeral pyre satyabhaamaa and the other wives of krishna entered the woods in order to practise penances in the contemplation of hari going beyond himavat, they took up their abode in kalaapa graama. then arjuna entered the retreat of vyaasa . asked by vyaasa, arjuna informed him of what had passed . vyaasa said that the vrishnis and andhakas had been consumed by the brahmans curse it was destiny krishna, as also the paandavas, have finished their work the time has come for your departure from the world, etc. . arjuna entered haastinapura and informed yudhishthira of what had taken place .
maavelaka, pl v. maavellaka, pl.
maavellaka, pl a people .
maavelvaka, pl v. maavellaka, pl.
maya, an asura v . b, . asura, daitya, daiteya, daanava.
mayura, an asura .
meda1, a serpent .
meda2, name of a caste, .
medhaa, a goddess .
medhaatithi1, a rishi . c, .
medhaatithi2, a river .
medhaavikaa, a tirtha .
medhaavin1, son of baaladhi. in ancient times the muni baaladhi practised austerities in order to have an immortal son. he obtained a son medhaavin of a very irritable temper, but the gods did not make him immortal they only granted the boon that he should live as long as the mountains existed. medhaavin grew haughty, and insulted the munis. the learned dhanushaaksha then cursed him, saying, be thou reduced to ashes. when, however, medhaavin was not reduced to ashes, dhaanushaaksha caused the mountains to be scattered by buffaloes, and then medhaavin perished. as his father bewailed him, the munis quoted the following gaathaa a mortal on no condition can overcome what has been ordained by fate, etc .
medhaavin2, a brahman .
medhyaa, a river .
medhyaaranya, a forest .
medini, . prithivi.
meghahrit, v. meshahrit.
meghamaalaa, a matri. u, .
meghamaalin, a companion of skanda. u, .
meghanaada, a warrior of skanda. u, .
meghapushpa, one of krishnas horses .
megharavaa, a maatri. u, .
meghasandhi1, a king .
meghasandhi2, king in raajagriha, son of sahadeva . maagadha, magadheshvara, sahadevaja, sahadevaatmaja.
meghasvanaa, a maatri. u, .
meghavaahana, a king .
meghavaahini, v. meshavaahini.
meghavaasas, an asura .
mekala, pl a people .
melaka, pl v. mekala.
menaa, a river .
menakaa, an apsaras .
meru1, a mountain . g, . h, . i, . d, . f, . u, . f, . c, . b, . b, . b, sthulashiras practised austerities, mo praaguttareo samudrasya ca sarvaratnai sankhyopalaanaam udakasya vaapi shakyam vaktumsuvarnotpattigangaa dropped the semen of rudra on meruaanushaasanik.shringe samaasinam pitaamahamchattropaanahotpattiprabhaam mopage4 b aanushaasanik.kaancanaparvatehastikutalibations oflokaaanushaasanik.samvartta maruttiyaat m. himavatpaarshva uttare marutta caused golden vessels, etc to be made and performed a sacrificegurushishyas.parvataanaam mahaa m sarveshaam agraja smritaanugitaap.r muniganair ivamahaaprasthaanikap.mahaashailam mm shikharinaam varam
meru2, a mountain in shaakadvipa. b, .
merubhuta, pl a people .
merusaavarna, a rishi .
merusaavarni, a rishi .
meruvraja, the city of the raakshasa king virupaaksha. b, .
mesha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
meshahrit, a suparna, son of garuda .
meshapravaaha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
meshasandhi, v. meghasandhi.
meshavaahini, a maatri. u, .
mishraka, name of a tirtha .
mishrakeci, an apsaras . b, .
mishrin, a serpent .
mithilaa, the capital of the videhas . b, . b, . f, .
mithila, pl. .
mitra, one of the aadityas . b, . u, . ff, . b, . b, . g, .
mitraa, an apsaras. b, .
mitrabhaanu, a king .
mitradeva, a kuru warrior .
mitradharman, a god .
mitrajna, a god .
mitrasaha, the proper name of kalmaashapaada saudaasa, .
mitrasaahvayaa, a goddess .
mitrasena, a kuru warrior .
mitravardhana, a god .
mitravarman1, a paancaala warrior .
mitravarman2, a kuru warrior .
mitravat, a god .
mitravinda, a fire .
mleccha, pl. . c, . e, . b, . b, . c, . f, . d, . b, . b, .
mleccha, sg said of two anga princes . .
modaagiri, a mountain .
modaakin, a varsha in shaakadvipa. b, .
modaapura, a city .
mohana, a city .
mohani, name of a particular spell .
mriga, pl the brahmans in shaakadvipa. b, .
mriga, pl. . do. = shiva .
mrigashiras, name of a nakshatra, v. su. si . mrigottama.
mrigadhuma, a tirtha .
mrigamandaa, daughter of krodhavashaa .
mrigasvapnodbhavaparvan . in consequence of a dream of yudhishthira, in which the still remnant deer of dvaitavana entreated him to spare them by changing his residence, the paandavas with indrasena, etc and the brahmans removed to the kaamyaka forest, situated at the head of the desert, near lake trinabindu. they had then dwelt in dvaitavana during a year and eight months .
mrigavaanaarpana, v. mrigabaanaarpana.
mrigavyaadha1, a rudra .
mrigottama, a nakshatra .
mritapaa, an asura . amritapa.
mrittikaavati, a city .
mrityu1, masc sometimes identified with antaka and yama, .
mrityu4, fem. naarada said to akampana in the beginning the grandsire brahmaan created all creatures. as the creation bore no sign of decay, he began to think about the destruction of the universe. failing to find any means of destruction, he became angry, and in consequence of his anger a fire sprang from the apertures of his body and destroyed all creatures. then shiva appealed to brahmaan, who said, thou hast been born out of our wish, and that the earth, afflicted with the heavy weight of creatures, had asked him to destroy them. shiva, saying that he had been appointed by brahmaan the protector of creatures, prevailed upon brahmaan to keep his wrath within his own inner self and extinguish the fire. then brahmaan expounded the trine of pravritti and nivritti. from his organs of sense then issued a female who was dark, etc and set out for the southern quarter brahmaan called her death and told her to slay the creatures. she wept, but brahmaan caught her tears with his two hands and implored her who wished to go to the hermitage of dhenuka to perform austerities to slay the creatures. soon brahmaan smiled, the creatures continued to live as before, and mrityu proceeded to dhenuka, where she practised austere vows during twenty one times ten billions of years, and then she wandered, billions of years with the creatures. next she repaired to nandaa and there passed, years, and became purified from all her sins. then she went to kaushiki, where she lived upon air and water only. then she repaired to pancagangaa and next to vetasaka, then to the gangaa and thence to meru, motionless and suspending her life breaths. thence to the top of himavat for a billion of years standing on the toe only of her feet. then to pushkara, and gokarna, and naimisha, and malaya, with steady devotion to the grandsire without acknowledging any other god. brahmaan was gratified with her and said that in slaying the creatures she should be without sin yama and the diseases should become her helpmates. she prevailed upon him that the passions, covetousness, etc should tear the bodies of the creatures before she slew them. her tears which were in his hands should become diseases springing from the creatures themselves and kill men she should be the virtue of living creatures and the goddess of this virtue. sin would slay those who were of wicked behaviour it will be thy work to sink them in their sins that are wicked. naarada further expounded the nature of death and told akampana not to grieve for his dead son, . b, .
. c substantially the same as, but told to anukampaka .
mucukunda, an ancient king . b in days of yore vaishravana, having been gratified, made a gift of this earth to the raajarshi m. the latter did not accept the gift, but said, desire to enjoy a sovereignty which is won by prowess of arms. at this vaishravana was highly delighted. m. ruled the earth, having conquered it by prowess, . g, .
mucukunaakhyaana . g . king mucukunda, having subjugated the whole earth, repaired to kubera in order to test his strength. kubera created a large force of raa who annihilated the forces of mucukunda. mucukunda rebuked his priest vasishtha, who then by penances caused those raa. to be slain. kuberas haughty address and mucukundas manly answer.
mudaavarta, v. udaavarta.
mudgala, a rishi . vyaasa said there lived in kurukshetra a virtuous sage named mudgala, who lived by picking up ears of corn and grain, collecting a drona of corn during one fortnight and eating it together with his son and wife the other fortnight yet he celebrated the sattra called ishtikrita and the darsha and paurnamaasa sacrifices, where indra himself and the gods partook of the food offered, and entertained his guests with food, for the remainder of the drona of corn increased as soon as a guest appeared, so that hundreds of brahmans were fed with it he lived himself on the food that remained after the gods and the guests had eaten. having heard of m. durvaasas, naked and frantic, came to him uttering insulting words, and during six seasons ate up all his food, without perceiving any agitation in m.s heart. durvaasas then told m. that in reward he should go to heaven even in his own body. immediately a celestial messenger appeared upon a chariot yoked with swans and cranes, etc and invited m. to ascend it. m. first asked the devaduta to tell him about the advantages and disadvantages of heaven . the devaduta then described heaven, with its advantages myriads of beautiful worlds owned by the gods, the saadhyas, the vishve, the maharshis, the yaamas, the dhaamas, the gandharvas, and the apsarases meru extending over, yojanas the gardens of the celestials nandana, etc. no grief, etc no sweat, stench, excreta, nor urine, nor dust the foremost regions are the regions of brahmaan thither repair sanctified rishis and there dwell the ribhus, the gods of the gods themselves, who suffer no pangs from women, not possess wealth, etc not subsist on oblations nor amrita, and cannot be perceived by the senses, nor they change at the revolution of a kalpa for them there is neither ecstasy, nor joy, nor happiness, nor misery, etc. they are thirty three in number, to their regions repair wise men after having observed excellent vows, and also m. had acquired that success by his charity. its disadvantages while reaping the fruit of his acts a person cannot be engaged in any others, for this world is one of acts, the other one of fruition after one has entirely exhausted his merit, he is subject to fall he is then stupefied and agitated by emotions, and when the garlands of those who are to fall fade away, fear invades their hearts but by reason of their merits they take birth among men, and then they attain to high fortune and happiness, while, if one cannot acquire knowledge here, he comes by an inferior birth. as m. did not desire to go to heaven, but asked a region where people have not to lament nor to be pained nor agitated, the devaduta described to him the supreme seat of vishnu, which is called the highest braahman and lies above the abode of brahmaan thither only those who are free from selfishness, etc and those who are given to contemplation and yoga, can repair. then m. bade farewell to the devaduta, and being always engaged in meditation, etc he at last attained to that supreme state of perfection . therefore, vyaasa continued, you also, o son of kunti, ought not to grieve after the thirteenth year you will get back your king. having said this vyaasa returned to his hermitage to practise austerities, . b, . maudgalya.
mudgala, pl. . a people .
mudgara, a serpent .
mudgaraparnaka, a serpent .
mudgarapindaka, a serpent .
muditaa, wife of saha .
muharaparnaka, v. mudgaraparnaka.
muhurta1, pl. = surya, . do. = shiva .
muka1, a serpent .
muka2, an asura . raakshasa.
mukhamandikaa, a female demon .
mukhara, a serpent .
muktimati, v. shuktimati.
mukuta, pl a people .
mukutaa, a maatri. u, .
mukutta, pl a people .
mumucu, a rishi .
munda, pl a people .
mundavedaanga, a serpent .
mundi, a maatri. u, .
muni1, son of ahar .
muni2, son of kuru .
muni4, fem mother of the devagandharvas mauneyas .
munidesha, a region in krauncadvipa .
munivirya, a vishvadeva .
munja, a brahman .
munjagraama, a city .
munjakesha1, a prince .
munjaketu, a king .
munjaprishtha, name of a place . munjaavata.
munjavat, a mountain . f a peak in himavat where shiva is constantly engaged in contemplation, accompanied by umaa, armed with his trident, surrounded by diverse hosts of bh and aed by r saa . yama, varuna, kubera, etc bh. and psh a g aps y . ri aa m and yaatudhaanas it looks resplendent like the morning sun there is neither heat nor cold, nor sun or wind, nor age, nor hunger, nor thirst, nor death, nor fear on all sides there are gold mines protected by the attendants of kubera, etc .
munjavata, a tirtha .
mura, v. muru.
murmuraa, a river .
muru, an asura, slain by krishna, . c, . f, . b, . hariv ch. foll.
mushaka, pl a people .
mushakaada, a serpent . mushikaada.
mushala, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
mushika, pl a people .
mushikaada, a serpent . mushakaada.
naabhaaga1, one or more ancient kings . b, .
naabhaagaarishta, son of manu vaivasvata .
nabhoda, a vishvadeva .
naacika, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
naaciketa, a rishi, son of uddaalaki . the next.
naaciketu, a muni . the prec.
naacina, pl a people .
naadijangha, a crane, son of kashyapa . b, .
naaga, pl sons of kashyapa and kadru . b, . b, . b, . b foll . b, . d, . d, . b, . d, .
naaga, adj. .
naagashata, a mountain .
naagaashin, a suparna, son of garuda .
naagadatta, a son of dhritaraashtra .
naagadhanvan, a tirtha on the sarasvati. g n. is swarming with numerous snakes, it was the abode of vaasuki and of, rishis there is no fear of snakes. there the gods had installed vaasuki as king of all the snakes, .
naagadvipa, a region .
naagaahvaya2, a city of the naagas on the gomati. b, .
naagaloka . c, . b, . c the n. extended thousand of yojanas on all sides, and had many walls of pure gold, and was decked with jewels and gems there were many fine tanks of water with flights of staircases made of pure crystal, and many rivers of clear and transparent water uttanka also saw many trees with diverse species of birds the gate was five yojanas high and yojanas in width, .
naagapati, pl. .
naagatirtha, a tirtha .
naagavatman, v. naagadhanvan.
nagnajit, a king . c, .
nagnajita, pl a people or a family .
naagodbheda, a tirtha .
nahusha1, a serpent . nahusha2.
nahusha2, an ancient king, son of aayus and father of yayaati, etc for some time king of the gods, but cursed and born as a serpent . n. protected the pitris, gods, rishis, brahmans, gandharvas, uragas, raakshasas, etc. having slain the dasyus, he made the rishis pay tribute and carry him on their back like beasts of burden, and having conquered the gods, he became indra, . n. had six sons yati, yayaati, samyaati, ayaati, ayati, and dhruva. yati betaking himself to asceticism, yayaati became the successor of n. and begot with devayaani, yadu and turvasu, and with shaarmishthaa, druhyu, anu, and puru, . e, . b, . b, aayusha putramrepetition from aanushaasanik.sya samvaadam maharshesh cyavanasya cacyavanop.how cyavana was purchased by n. at the price of a cowaanushaasanik.had made gifts of kineshapathavidhinahushop.sya ca samvaadam agastyasya bhrigos tathaadevendrasyathe story of n.s becoming the king of the gods and falling from that place and allusion to aanushaasanik.abstained from meat during the month of kaarttikakrishna vaasudevason of aayus and father of yayaatiaanushaasanik.enumerationking of the godsnnnnkulord of the godstvam
. b nahusha, having acquired the sovereignty of heaven, performed both human and celestial acts, for instance bali and offering of incense and of light, etc. and although he had become the chief of the gods, he yet worshipped the gods as in days of yore. but then he was filled with pride in consequence of the boon he had received from all the gods, and he ceased to perform religious actions for a very long time he used to employ the ri. by turns as the bearers of his vehicles but in consequence of his abstention from religious acts his energy began to diminish when it was agastyas turn to carry the vehicle, bhrigu came to the hermitage of agastya, and when the latter, mentioning brahmaans boon to nahusha, and that brahmaan had given him amrita to drink, despaired of being able to curse him, bhrigu said that he had come at the command of brahmaan, and that he would curse nahusha to be a snake, when he insulted agastya by a kick, and this very day he would hurl him n and re establish indra. agastya became highly gratified . asked by yudhishthira, bhishma continued nahusha ordered ri. agastya to carry the vehicle from the banks of sarasvati. bhrigu, telling agastya to close his eyes, had entered the matted locks of agastya, taking care not to cast his eyes upon nahusha. nahusha urged agastya on with his goad and then struck him on the head with his left foot. then nahusha was cursed by bhrigu and transformed into a snake, but, in consequence of his gifts, etc he retained his memory, and, assisted by agastya, pacified bhrigu, who said that yudhishthira would rescue him, and then went to the abode of brahmaan and informed him, while agastya returned to his own hermitage. brahmaan once more installed indra in the sovereignty of heaven. thou hast, o king, rescued nahusha from bhrigus curse he ascended to the abode of brahmaan before thy eyes in consequence of the merits he had acquired through acts of the kind have mentioned, he succeeded in once more regaining his lost position. hence, when evening comes, persons leading the estic mode of life, should give lamps .
naigameya, a god associated to or a form of skanda . u, .
naighantuka, a collection of vedic words .
naikadrish, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
naikaprishtha, pl. .
naimisha, a sacred forest . i, . b, . c, . n, . o, . naimishaaranya.
naimisha, pl a people .
naimishakunja, a tirtha .
naimisheya, adj. . h, . next.
naimishiya, adj. . h, . o, . prec.
nairrita1, pl. = raakshasa, pl . u, . x, . b, .
nairrita2, pl a people .
nairrita, adj. . u, .
nairriti, an asura. b, .
naishaada, adj. . b, .
naishadha2, the king of the nishadhas at the time of yudhishthira .
naishadhya, adj. .
naishaadi5, a kuru warrior .
naaka, name of a weapon .
nakshatra1, mostly pl . do. = shiva .
nakshatraraaj =, .
nakshatraraaja =, .
nakula, paandava . e taught by drona, n. became an atiratha, . n. assailed rohitaka and vanquished there the mattamayurakas, etc. vaasudeva and shalya accepted his sway, etc camels carried with difficulty the treasures he had earned when he returned to indraprastha, . e yudhishthira said to sanjaya n. was formerly sent under your eye to conquer the shibis and the trigartas, and brought the western region under my power, . f n. had vanquished the whole western region teeming with mlecchas, . l n. was borne by excellent steeds presented by mahendra, and like to the wind in might and speed, bis, อด, . aashvineya, ashvinisuta, ashvisuta, aajamidha3, bhaarata, bharatashreshtha, bharatarshabha, daamagranthi, granthika, kurushreshtha, maadravatiputra, maadravatisuta, maadreya, maadrinandana, maadrinandanaka, maadri putra, maadrisuta, maadritanuja, paandava, paandaveya, paandunandana, paanduputra, paandusuta, yama, yamaja .
naakula, pl a people .
nakulaakhyaana . b at the conclusion of yudhishthiras horse sacrifice, after everybody had been gratified, a blue eyed mungoose, with one side of its body changed into gold, came and said, in voice as loud and deep as thunder, that this great sacrifice was not equal to a prastha of powdered barley given away by a liberal brahman of kurukshetra, who was observing the uncha vow. asked by the brahmans the mungoose related the brahman named lived with his wife, son, and daughter in law, and practised penances he used to eat every day at the sixth division during a famine he had nothing to eat day after day one day in the month of jyaishtha, while the sun was in the meridian, he was picking up grains of corn, but got nothing one after the sixth division had come, he obtained a prastha of barley, which they reduced to powder for making saktu having finished their recitations and libations, etc they divided the powdered barley among themselves, so that each got a kudava then came a guest, who ate all the portions, the wife, son, and daughter in law with difficulty prevailing upon the brahman to give their portions as well. the guest turned out to be dharma flowers were rained n from heaven . ri, g devadutas, etc and b. ri. standing in vimaanas and dwelling in brahmaloka were struck with wonder have been rescued, and others who have not yet come have been rescued for countless yugas he that gives away having, having, and a handful of water having no wealth, are equal in merit, citing rantideva, nriga, and shibi aushinara thou hast conquered brahmaloka. the brahman, with his wife, son, and daughter in law, proceeded to heaven on a celestial chariot. the mungoose continued came out of my hole, and by the contact with the powder of barley, etc my head and half of my body became gold in order to convert the rest of my body into gold repeatedly repair to the hermitages of ascetics and to the sacrifices of kings came hither with high hopes, but have not been made into gold. then the mungoose disappeared . that mungoose was dharma, who having injured jama dagni had been cursed by the pitris, but became freed from the curse by disparaging himself in the form of yudhishthira .
nala1, king of the nishadhas, son of virasena, and husband of damayanti . also the following synonyms naishadha, . nishadhaadhipa, . nishadhaadhipati, . nishadharaajendra, . nishadheshvara, . punyashloka, . virasenasuta
nala2, a monkey .
naalaa, a river .
nalakaanana, pl a people .
nalakubara, a son of kubera . b . n. cursed raavana, who had ravished rambhaa, the spouse of n that he should never be able to violate an unwilling woman, . x, .
nalini, a river . f, . next.
nalini, said of kuberas lotus tank . the prec.
nalopaakhyaana, i.e. nalopaakhyaanaparvan .
. one when the paandavas were grieving for arjuna, bhima asked yudhishthira to permit him to go and slay duryodhana, interpreting the time to be complete, but he did not prevail upon yudhishthira. while they were conversing the great rishi brihadashva came before them, and, asked by yudhishthira if there was on earth a king more unfortunate than himself, he said that he would narrate a history of a prince more miserable than yudhishthira, viz. nala, who, defeated deceitfully by pushkara, dwelt in the woods with his spouse, having neither slaves nor chariots nor brothers nor friends with him . brihadashva said the nishadha king nala, the son of virasena, was above all kings, etc and fond of dice. the vidarbha king bhima was granted by the brahmarshi damana a daughter, damayanti, and three excellent sons, dama, daanta, and damana. both nala and damayanti had not their equals in beauty, and, continually hearing of each others virtues, they conceived attachment to each other, though they had never seen each other. once nala in his garden saw a number of golden winged swans and caught one of them, but let it loose, as it promised to speak well of him before damayanti. the swans having arrived at the vidarbha country, the one who had been caught by nala led damayanti to a secluded spot and fulfilled its mission. damayanti caused it to speak to nala of her . as damayanti became sick of love, her father invited all the kings to her svayamvara. at this time the rishis of the gods naarada and parvata, having arrived in course of their wanderings at the regions of indra, told him that the kings did not now come to him because they were intent on the svayamvara of damayanti. hearing this, the lokapaalas set out on their vehicles for the svayamvara, but seeing nala on the way and filled with astonishment at his beauty, they left their chariots in the sky and asked nala to be their messenger . nala promised to so, but when indra told him to go to damayanti and tell her that indra, agni, varuna, and yama desired her to choose one of them for her lord, he asked them to spare him as he had come with the same object but, as they insisted that he should stand by his promise, he by their power entered without being perceived by the guardians into the apartments of damayanti, and, saying his name, fulfilled his mission . damayanti declared that if she did not become the wife of nala himself she would resort to poison, or fire, or water, or the rope. nala advised her to choose one of the gods, maintaining that having come in a different mission he dared not seek his own interest. damayanti then told him to come to her svayamvara in company with the gods, then she would choose him, at which no blame would be his, and nala returned to the lokapaalas and told them what had happened . at the sacred hour of the holy lunar day of the auspicious season bhima summoned the kings to the svayamvara, and that assembly of kings resembled the bhogavati swarming with naagas. damayanti, beholding five persons all alike in appearance, and recollecting the marks of the celestials, of which she had heard from old people, was unable to distinguish which of them was nala. filled with grief, she then decided upon seeking the protection of the gods themselves, and prevailed upon them that they assumed their true shapes. thereupon she beheld the gods unmoistened with perspiration, with unwinking eyes and unfading garlands, not stained with dust, and staying without touching the ground, while nala was revealed by his sha, his fading garlands, and by his being stained with dust and sweat, and resting on the ground with winking eyes. she then chose nala, seizing the hem of his garment and placing a floral wreath round his neck. nala promised damayanti that he would remain hers as long as he lived, and she spoke words of like import to him. the lokapaalas bestowed each a couple of boons on nala indra, that he should be able to behold his divine nature in sacrifices, and blessed regions thereafter agni, his own presence wherever he wished and regions as bright as himself yama, subtle taste in food and pre eminence in virtue varuna, water wherever he desired and garlands of celestial fragrance. then the gods went to heaven and the kings returned home. nala, after the wedding, stayed there for a time, returned home, ruled righteously, and celebrated the horse sacrifice, etc. he begat the son indrasena and the daughter indrasenaa upon damayanti . when the lokapaalas were returning they met dvaapara with kali going to the svayamvara, and indra told kali that damayanti had already chosen nala. as kali threatened to avenge himself he was rebuked by the lokapaalas, as nala had studied the four vedas with the aakhyaana as the fifth, etc. when the gods had gone to heaven, kali said that he would take possession of nala and deprive him of his king, and asked dvaapara to enter the dice . kali then went to the country of the nishadhas and always watched for an opportunity. at last, in the twelfth year, when nala, after answering a call of nature, touching water had said his twilight prayers without having washed his feet, kali entered his person. then kali becoming vrisha prevailed upon pushkara, that he challenged nala to a match of dice in order to acquire his king. nala and pushkara gambled together for many months, nala being always worsted no one amongst his friends could succeed in dissuading him from the play at last they came in a body, which was told by the suta to damayanti, who in vain represented it to nala he uttered not a word in reply . seeing that nala had lost everything, damayanti told her nurse and maidservant brihatsenaa to summon the councillors in the name of nala and tell them what had been lost the councillors approached nala, and damayanti informed him that the citizens had come again in a body, but he regarded her not. she then caused brihatsenaa to summon the suta vaarshneya, who at her request yoked nalas favourite horses and brought her two children to kundina . there he left the children, the chariot, and the horses, and went to ayodhyaa, where he entered the service of king rituparna as a charioteer . at last, when pushkara had won all nalas wealth and his king, he proposed to him to stake damayanti. but nala, feeling as if his heart would burst and gazing at pushkara in anguish without speaking a word, took all the ornaments off his body, and attired in a single piece of cloth left the city accompanied by damayanti. they stayed for three nights in the outskirts of the city, living on water alone. nobody showed him hospitable regards, as pushkara had proclaimed through the city that he that should show any attention to nala would be put to death. after many days nala saw some birds of golden hue and covered them with his cloth in order to catch them, but they rose up to the sky taking away that garment of his, and then told him they were the dice that had come hither to take away even his cloth. nala proposed to damayanti to leave him, pointing out to her the roads to avanti, rikshavat, vindhya, payoshni, vidarbha, koshala, and the south. but she would not leave him, but suggested that they should go to vidarbha . nala refused to appear before bhima in his state of misery. they went on attired in the same piece of cloth. once when damayanti had fallen into a profound slumber in a shed for travellers, nala, influenced by kali, resolved upon deserting damayanti, as separated from him she might perchance wander to her relatives. with a sword that he found near the shed he cut off one half of the cloth and throwing the instrument away departed, having first returned again and again, dragged away by kali, but drawn back by love . when damayanti awoke, she lamented and cursed the being through whose imprecation nala suffered woe, saying that it should lead a still more miserable life. thereupon, wandering on, she was seized by a gigantic serpent and rescued by a hunter as the hunter, after comforting her, tried to force her to love him, he was cursed by her and fell n lifeless upon the ground . description of the forest, damayantis lamentations. she went in a northerly direction for three days and nights, then she came to an asylum of ascetics, who told her that she should again become happy together with nala. then the asylum disappeared. sometime after wards, having proceeded a long way, she met with a body of merchants landing on the banks of a river its leader was shuci, and it was bound for the city of the cedi king subaahu . damayanti followed the caravan. once, at midnight, the caravan was destroyed by wild elephants and many men were trodden to death, which some ascribed to their not having worshipped manibhadra or vaishvavana, the kings of yakshas, others to their having received damayanti, whom they thought to be a raakshasa or pishaaca or yaksha woman, and resolved upon killing her when they saw her. hearing this damayanti fled. the next day the remnant of the caravan left the place. damayanti, with the brahmans that had survived the slaughter of the caravan, came towards evening to the city of the cedi king subaahu. the boys began to follow her when she came before the palace of the king, the queen mother let the nurse take her in. damayanti agreed to stay there on the conditions that she should not eat remnants, not wash anyones feet, nor speak with other men, but be protected against all aspirations. the queen gave her as a sairindhri to her daughter sunandaa . nala, having deserted damayanti, saw a conflagration in the forest and therefrom heard a voice calling him by name and saw the naaga karkotaka, who unable to stir, told him that he had deceived the great rishi naarada and been cursed by him with the words stay thou here immobile until nala takes thee hence, then thou shalt be freed from my curse, and asked him to deliver him and promised to instruct him in respect of his welfare. the snake then became as small as a thumb, and nala taking him up went to a spot free from fire. karkotaka let him proceed yet counting his steps, and bit him at the tenth step . then the form of nala was changed, in order that people might not recognize him, and karkotaka assumed his own form, and said that kali dwelling in nala should be tortured by his venom, and that nala should have no fear from animals with fangs, from enemies, and from men versed in the veda, and told him to go to ayodhyaa and present himself as a suta baahuka before rituparna, who would give nala his skill in dice in exchange for nalas knowledge of horses, and when he had become an adept at dice he should have prosperity and meet with his wife and children and regain his king. the naaga king then gave nala two pieces of celestial cloth, saying that when he desired to get back his own form he should remember him and wear this garment. then he disappeared . on the tenth day nala entered the city of rituparna he approached the king and named himself baahuka, and said that he surpassed everybody in managing steeds and might be consulted in matters of difficulty and affairs of skill, and that he was versed in the art of cooking. then he was appointed superintendent of rituparnas horses on a pay of, and vaarshneya and jivala should be under his direction. every evening he recited the shloka, where lies that helpless one afflicted with hunger and thirst and worn with toil, or upon whom s she now wait once jivala asked him who she was, and nala related to him the main features of his story without naming her or himself . bhima sent out brahmans in all directions to search for nala and damayanti, promising, kine, etc to him that should find them. at length the brahman sudeva, the friend of damayantis brother, recognized damayanti in the city of the cedis, seated with sunandaa during the time of the kings prayers, and told her who he was and that her relatives and children were well. beholding damayanti weeping and conversing in private with sudeva, sunandaa caused her mother to question sudeva . sudeva told the story of damayanti, and that he had recognized her by a mole between her eyebrows, which was now almost covered with dust as her whole body. then sunandaa washed away the dust and the queen mother recognized her by the mole as the daughter of her sister, as she and damayantis mother were both daughters of the dashaarna king sudaaman, and she herself had been bestowed on virabaahu and her sister on bhima she had witnessed damayantis birth in the palace of her father in the dashaarna country. at her own request damayanti was brought in a litter carried by men and protected by a large escort to the city of bhima, and was received with respect and worshipped the gods and brahmans. bhima gave unto sudeva, kine, etc. the next day damayanti let her mother cause bhima to send brahmans out in all directions to seek for nala. damayanti ordered them everywhere to recite the shlokas o beloved gambler, where hast thou gone, cutting off half of my garment, etc but to take care that no one knew that it was on her command . after a long time the brahman parnaada told that he had in ayodhyaa visited bhaangaasuri, and that baahuka had been affected by hearing his shloka, and had said to him chaste women, though overtaken by calamity, yet protect themselves, etc. damayanti then thanked parnaada and promised him great wealth and consulted with her mother, and, without bhimas knowing it, sent sudeva, who told rituparna that to morrow damayanti would hold another svayamvara . when ordered by rituparna to conduct him to the svayamvara of damayanti, baahuka felt his heart bursting with grief, but promised to go there in a single day he yoked four horses born in sindhu, made vaarshneya sit on the chariot, and set out with so great speed that vaarshneya thought he must be maatali or shaalihotra, who had taken a human shape, or nala . as the chariot was coursing thus, rituparna lost his upper garment, and nala declared that it was impossible to recover it, as they had already travelled one yojana thence. as rituparna rightly indicated the number of fruits of a vibhitaka tree, and said he was skilled in dice as in numbers, nala prevailed upon him to teach him the science and in future receive instead his science of horses. then kali came out from the body of nala, vomiting the poison of karkotaka, and assumed his own shape, as the fire of damayantis curse had left him, but remained invisible to others except nala. kali prevailed upon nala that he should not curse him, promising that those men who would attentively recite his history should be free from fear of him, and entered the vibhitaka tree till nala had gone far away. then kali returned to his abode. from the touch of kali the vibhitaka tree from that hour fell into disrepute. nala now became free from calamity, though he did not assume his original form . at night they arrived at kundina, having passed yojanas. the steeds of nala that were in that city, and peacocks and elephants and damayanti recognized the sound of nalas chariot damayanti ascended the terrace with the desire of seeing nala. the koshala king wondered, as he did not hear any talk of the svayamvara, etc and bhima thought that he had come simply to pay his respects. when rituparna had gone to his appointed quarters with vaarshneya, and baahuka, having tended the horses, was sitting at the side of the chariot, damayanti sent a female messenger in search of nala . the female messenger keshini asked baahuka about vaarshneya and himself he said that vaarshneya was the charioteer of nala, that nobody knew nala except nala himself and his wife, as he did not discover his marks of identity anywhere, and that he himself was the charioteer and cook of king rituparna at last she repeated the shloka of parnaada o beloved gambler, etc and said that damayanti wished again to hear the reply he had given parnaada then baahuka, weeping, said chaste women, though overtaken by calamity, etc and keshini went to damayanti and acquainted her with everything . damayanti again sent keshini to stay in silence at baahukas side and mark his conduct she related that low passages grew in height so that he might pass through them easily, that when he approached narrow holes opened wide, that only by his looking upon them the vessels became filled with water, that when he held a handful of grass in the sun the fire blazed up all of a sudden, that he touched fire and was not hurt, that water falling at his will flowed in a stream, and that flowers pressed with his hands became gayer and more fragrant than before. damayanti then caused keshini without baahukas knowledge to bring her some meat that had been boiled and dressed by him, from the kitchen, and recognized the taste. she then sent her two children with keshini. baahuka embraced them crying aloud, saying they were like his own children, and sent keshini away lest people might think evil . having obtained the consent both of her father and mother, damayanti caused nala to be brought to her apartments it came to an explication damayanti declared that she had feigned to hold a second svayamvara because no one except nala could in one day manage yojanas with horses, and swore by the air, sun, and moon, who had been her protector for these three years, and vaayu bore witness to the truth of her words. then a floral shower fell there, and the celestial kettledrum began to play. nala then wore the garment he had received from the serpent king and regained his old form. thus nala in the fourth year was reunited with his wife . the next day they presented themselves before bhima. the citizens were in great joy and aned the temples, etc. rituparna asked nalas forgiveness, and nala also asked rituparnas forgiveness, and made over to him his horse lore, having obtained from him the mystery of dice. then rituparna went away to his own city, employing another person as his charioteer . having dwelt for a month at kundina, nala set out for the nishadha country with a single white chariot, sixteen elephants, fifty horses, and infantry, and proposed to pushkara that they should gamble again, as nala had won great wealth the stake should be damayanti, wealth and king, and their lives if not, he proposed a single combat. pushkara, hoping to win damayanti, whom he loved, gladly consented to gamble, and lost at a single throw. nala, declaring that it was kali who had e it all, forgave his brother and granted him his portion, and after a month let him go to his own town. all the citizens and subjects rejoiced at nalas return . then nala with a large force brought damayanti and his children home, and passed his days in joy and performed numerous sacrifices with abundant gifts to brahmans. so thou also, o yudhishthira, wilt blaze forth in effulgence soon. they that will repeatedly recite this history of nala and they that will hear it recited will never be touched by adversity. as yudhishthira feared that some one skilled in dice might summon him, brihadashva taught him the science of dice and then went to ashvashiras for a bathe. yudhishthira then learnt from brahmans and ascetics from various directions that arjuna was still engaged in ascetic penances, and yudhishthira grieved for him .
namuci, an asura, slain by indra . s, . b, . b, . b, . asura, asurashreshtha, daityasattama.
nanda1, a son of dhritaraashtra . nandaka1.
nanda2, a drum in yudhishthiras standard .
nanda3, a cowherd. f, .
nanda4, a serpent .
nanda5, two warriors of skanda. u, .
nandaa, wife of harsha .
nandaa, a river . b, .
nandaashrama, a sacred place .
nandaka1, a son of dhritaraashtra . nanda1.
nandaka2, a serpent .
nandaka3, the sword of krishna .
nandaka4, a warrior of skanda. u, .
nandana1, a celestial forest . bis, . b, . b, . b, vanam, vishvarupa dwelt therepunaraavartanandaahaving bathed in punaraavartanandaa, etc one after death repairs to n.hastikuta.differently pcr.lokavanamumaa maheshvarasamv.aadishuashvamedhikap.ashvinaav iva ne
nandana2, a companion of skanda. u, .
nandi1, a devagandharva .
nandi2, a follower of shiva. g, . nandishvara, nandin.
nandishvara1, a follower of shiva . nandi, nandin.
nandigraama, a city .
nandikunda, a tirtha .
nandin1, a follower of shiva . nandi, nandishvara.
nandini, the cow of vasishtha, .
nandini, a tirtha .
nandini, a maatri. u, .
nandisena, a companion of skanda. u, .
nandivega, pl a people .
naptri, a vishvadeva .
nara, pl a class of gandharvas .
naarada1, a devarshi, son of parameshthin, often mentioned together with gandharvas and therefore presumably himself a gandharva. naarada2 bis . b, . b, bis, . d, . ii, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, instructed by naaraayanainstructed vyaasaunchavrittyup.maharshinaamaharshirelated the unchavrittyupaakhyaana to indraaanushaasanik.attends on shiva with song and music parvatash caiva, came to see bhishmasya ca samvaadam vaasudevasya cobhayodiscourse between n. and krishnaa saying of his is quoted.sya ca samvaadam pumshcalyaa pancacudayaadevarshidiscourse between n. and pancacudaadevadarshanadiscoursed to bhishma on gifts of fooddevakyaash ca samvaadam maharsher nsya cadevadarshanamdevarshidiscourse between devaki and n. parvatash caiva, sungshapathavidhi parvatauaanushaasanik.discoursed to bhishmanandananandanam nsyaaanushaasanik.a saying of his is quotedworshipped the kine parvatau, came to krishnadevarshinaaraayanasuhritumaa maheshvarasamv.related the discourse between shiva and umaaaanushaasanik.rishaya...npramukhaasaankhyayogautathyasent by utathya to varunakapa. pl.aanushaasanik.enumerationsvargarohanik. p.had told bhishma that krishna was naaraayanaashvamedhikap.had instructed yudhishthirasamvartta maruttiyadevarshinaamaharshinaadirected marutta to seek samvartta for his ritvijashvamedhikap.had comforted yudhishthirapage5 a devarshinaabraahmanagitaasya ca samvaadam risher devamatasya cadiscourse between n. and devamataanugitaap.had taught arjuna that krishna was the supreme godpresent at the ashvamedha of yudhishthiraaashramavaasap. parvatash caivadevarshidivyadarshitold dhritaraashtra that only three years of life were left for himputradarshanap. parvatash caivaall. to ch. naaradaagamanap.devarshireported the death of dhritaraashtra, gaandhaari, and kuntimausalap.cursed shaamba, etc.knew krishna to be vishnumahaaprasthaanikap.praised yudhishthirasya vacasvargaarohanap.in heavenmahaabhaaratarecited the mahaabhaarata to the gods
naarada2, a devagandharva . u, .
naarada3, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
. vaishampaayana said two years after their return from the retreat of dhritaraashtra the paandavas were visited by . ri. naarada. yudhishthira inquired after dhritaraashtra, etc. naarada said after thy return from kurukshetra, dhritaraashtra proceeded towards gangaadvaara with the sacrificial fire and gaandhaari, kunti, sanjaya, and all the yaajakas. they themselves took to severe austerities, while the sacred fire was duly worshipped by the yaajakas. they wandered about, sanjaya acting as a guide, prithaa becoming the eye of gaandhaari. once dhritaraashtra bathed in the gangaa, and was returning to his retreat. a violent forest conflagration set in dhritaraashtra dismissed sanjaya and sat n, facing the east, with gaandhaari and kunti they concentrated their soul, and were burnt by the conflagration. sanjaya escaped and was seen by me on the banks of the gangaa in the midst of ascetics he bade them farewell and started for himavat. in the course of my wanderings saw the three bodies. the ascetics, from whom heard all the details, did not at all grieve for them. vaishampaayana said the paandavas and the citizens felt great grief . yudhishthira lamented . naarada comforted yudhishthira by informing him of the sacred character of the fire that had burnt dhritaraashtra and the two queens. when dhritaraashtra entered the woods he caused his sacrificial fires to be duly ignited having performed his sacred rites with them he abaned them all then the yaajakas had left them in a solitary part of the wood and gone away the fires thus left to themselves produced a general conflagration this is what have heard from the ascetics on the gangaa. vaishampaayana said headed by yuyutsu the paandavas and the citizens all proceeded to the gangaa in order to offer oblations of water to the deceased king and queens. then they came back, taking up their residence outside the city. yudhishthira sent, a number of men to the retreat to cremate the remains of his uncle, aunt, and mother in due form. on the twelfth day he performed the shraaddhas with gifts in abundance . then all returned to haastinapura. the great ri. naarada, having comforted yudhishthira, went away. dhritaraashtra had passed three years in the forest and fifteen years in the city. yudhishthira was plunged in grief .
. b ri. naarada and his sisters son parvata had in days of old left heaven for a pleasant ramble on earth in order to taste clarified butter and rice. they wandered under a compact of telling each other their inmost thoughts. they arrived at the court of srinjaya . naarada was taken with the charms of srinjayas daughter sukumaari but shamefulness prevented him from disclosing his love to parvata, who then cursed him for his reticence, saying that sukumaari should become his wife, but then she and every man should behold him in the shape of an ape. naarada cursed parvata in return, saying that he should not succeed in proceeding to heaven. parvata began to wander over the earth. sukumaari beheld naarada as an ape, but devoted herself entirely to him, and did not desire any mu or y. for a husband. naarada and parvata, after some time, became reconciled and withdrew their mutual curses. sukumaari fled, thinking naarada to be somebody else, but was informed by parvata. parvata proceeded to heaven and naarada to his home. krishna continued ri. naarada is here he will tell thee everything that happened .
naaradin, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
naraka1, an asura, son of bhumi and slain by krishna . prithivinjaya, in the palace of varunaraaja suyaarambhap. murun ca narakan caiva shaasti yo yavanaadhipa, name of a countrykrishna vaasudevabhaumam, krishna slew n. and recovered the ear rings nisunda nau hatau, destroying the bonds of muru, krishna slew nisunda and n. and made safe the way to praagjyotisha harivamsha, v. foll.gandhamaadanapr.asthini daityasya nsya, in the northaindram...sthaanamdaityendraatnivaatakavacayuddhap.prahlaada nau, have been defeated by indraghoshayaatraap.hatasya nsyaatmaa karnamurtim upaashritya, possessed karnakarno py aavishtacittaatmaa nsyaantaraatmanaa, krishna vaasudevabhauma, robbed the ear rings of aditi, bbhaumam, slain by krishna, yaanasandhip.had been defeated by krishnabhagavadyaanap.page5 a a saha daanavai, bshaarnganirjitya nm bhaumam aahritya manikundale, bdronaabhishekap.had been slain by krishnavaishna vaastrabhumi, the mother of n. asked the vaishnava weapon for her son, from him it passed over to bhagadattasamshaptaka vadhap.had been slain by krishnakarnap.yathaa krishnena no murash ca nihata, braajadh.santraasarakshamandalakaarine vishnave, i.e. krishnamokshadh.daanavamukhyaa...naadyaa mahaasuraabali vaasavas.among the ancient rulers of the earthnaaraayaniyabhaumam, will be slain by naaraayana, incarnate as krishna
naraka2, tirtha .
nara naaraayanau. d once brihaspati and ushanas went to brahmaan, and also the maruts with indra, the vasus with agni, the aadityas, the saadhyas, the seven rishis, the gandharva vishvaavasu, the gunas of apsarases, and having bowed n to brahmaan they sat around him. just then the two ancient deities, the rishis nara and naaraayana, left the place. brihaspati said to brahmaan who are these two that leave the place without worshipping thee brahmaan said that they were nara and naaraayana who had come from the world of men to the world of brahmaan worshipped by the gods and the gandharvas they exist only for the destruction of the asuras. indra went to the spot where those two were practising austerities, accompanied by all the gods headed by brihaspati. at that time the gods had been very much alarmed in consequence of a war with the asuras. indra obtained the boon that nara and naaraayana assisted him in the battle . both of them, by their acts, enjoy numerous eternal and celestial regions, and are repeatedly born in the times of war. even this is what naarada, conversant with the vedas, had said to the vrishnis.
nararaashtra, v. navaraashtra.
narasimha . b, .
naarasimha, adj. . c, . d, . b, .
naaraayana, pl a tribe of cowherds .
naaraayana, adj. . b, . g, .
naaraayanaastra . naaraayana, adj.
the of the minor parvans of the mhbhr. . the last part of the th day. after the fall of drona, the kurus, even duryodhana, etc fled away, kritavarman with the remnant of his bhoja troops, etc susharman with the remnant of the samshaptakas. only ashvatthaaman did not flee ashvatthaaman shikhandin, etc. . ashvatthaaman asked duryodhana why the troops were fleeing away, even karnas troops duryodhana caused kripa to inform ashvatthaaman of the truth, at which ashvatthaaman was filled with rage . dhritaraashtra asked sanjaya what ashvatthaaman said, he who knew the weapons of men and vaaruna, etc. . sanjaya related ashvatthaaman complained before duryodhana that his father has been killed, and vowed to destroy the paancaalas and the paandavas neither nor g as u raa etc were able to vanquish him there were none equal to him and arjuna in knowledge of weapons he had a weapon that neither arjuna, etc. knew, given by naaraayana to his father as a boon, with the promise that no man should ever be his equal in battle only, this weapon must never be used in haste, etc and never be hurled upon persons that aban their chariots or weapons in battle, etc. with this he would rout and slay the paandavas, etc. . the kuru army rallied many blew their conches, etc. the paandavas took counsel of one another ashvatthaaman touched water and invoked the naaraayana weapon . fierce omens in nature appeared. daa and g. became inspired with fear. dhritaraashtra asked sanjaya what counsel was ated by the paandavas in order to protect dhrishtadyumna on seeing the retreating kauravas once more advance to battle, rallied by ashvatthaaman. sanjaya related yudhishthira spoke about the matter to arjuna, fearing that it was indra himself who was approaching for the sake of the kauravas. arjuna in reply described the prowess of ashvatthaaman and the unrighteousness of the paandavas in slaying drona all of us have passed the greater part of our lives the days that remain to us are few this exceedingly unrighteous act has stained that remnant did not interfere, as he was about to be slain for this fault have already sunk into hell, overcome with shame . bhimasena, reproaching arjuna, vindicated the deed can, with my arrows, rout the united . with indra at their head, and as u and men. then dhrishtadyumna spoke in justification of his conduct . asked by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related all the other persons present remained silent arjuna, glancing obliquely towards dhrishtadyumna, seemed to reproach him with tears and sighs yudhishthira, etc. stood ashamed saatyaki wrathfully rebuked dhrishtadyumna . dhrishta dyumna in reply taunted saatyaki with the slaughter of bhurishrasas . saatyaki rushed towards dhrishtadyumna in order to slay him bhima, urged by krishna, held him back sahadeva endeavoured to bring about a reconciliation dhrishtadyumna asked bhima to let him slay saatyaki then he or arjuna would slay the enemies. krishna and yudhishthira restored peace with great difficulty, and all the warriors proceeded to battle . ashvatthaaman caused a great carnage among the paandava troops before duryodhana he repeated his vow . duryodhana rallied his troops. ashvatthaaman invoked the naaraayana weapon . the paandavas, etc became exceedingly agitated. yudhishthira, relying on krishna, advised dhrishtadyumna to flee away with his paancaalas, and saatyaki with the vrishnis and andhakas he and his brothers would ascend a funeral pile . krishna prevailed upon the troops to lay n their weapons and alight from their chariots. bhimasena alone refused to so, and dissuaded the others . arjuna said that his vow was that the gaandiva should not be used against the naaraayana weapon, kine, and brahmans. bhima attacked ashvatthaaman, but was overwhelmed by the energy of the naaraayana weapon . arjuna covered bhimasena with the vaaruna weapon, arjuna and krishna, alighting from their chariot, proceeded on foot towards bhima and forcibly brought him n from his chariot, making him aban his weapons. then the naaraayana weapon became neutralized all the quarters became clear, etc. the paandava host stood arrayed once more. duryodhana urged ashvatthaaman to use the same weapon once more ashvatthaaman said that it could not be used twice if brought back it would without bt slay himself. duryodhana then urged him to slay the enemies with other weapons. dhritaraashtra asked, what then came to pass sanjaya related dhrishtadyumna ashvatthaaman, who deprived dhrishtadyumna of his steeds, driver, and chariot the paancaalas fled away. saatyaki ashvatthaaman, who was worsted by him. duryodhana, etc saatyaki, who made them flee away deprived of their chariots. ashvatthaaman saatyaki, who once more deprived him of his chariot and caused him to retreat the paandavas blew their conches, and saatyaki slew of vrishasenas division, etc. . ashvatthaaman saatyaki ashvatthaaman repeated his vow saatyaki was carried away by his driver. ashvatthaaman dhrishtadyumna, who was much afflicted arjuna, etc ashvatthaaman, who slew sudarshana, paurava, and the young cedi prince. bhima ashvatthaaman bhima was carried away by his steeds the paancaalas fled away . arjuna ashvatthaaman arjuna addressed ashvatthaaman in harsh words . dhritaraashtra asked sanjaya about the cause of this, as arjuna and ashvatthaaman loved each other. sanjaya said that it was in consequence of his grief . ashvatthaaman became angry with arjuna and especially with krishna, touched water, and made use of the aagneya weapon, from which dire omens in nature appeared, and a great slaughter in the paandava army resulted raa. and psh. uttered fierce cries, etc. . arjuna invoked the braahma weapon the darkness was dispelled, etc. a full akshauhini of the paandava troops had been killed krishna and arjuna were unwounded the paandavas rejoiced, the kauravas wondered, ashvatthaaman was disconsolate, and ran away from the fight he met vyaasa, and asked him the reason neither as nor g psh raa u y and birds, nor men can baffle this weapon. vyaasa told him the story of naaraayana nara and naaraayana are arjuna and krishna even ashvatthaa man has been born as a portion of rudra, and was endued with great wis, regarding the universe to consist only of mahaadeva, etc and shiva had granted him numerous boons, and he had, in every yuga, aed the great god in his phallic form. krishna had sprung from rudra himself, and always worshipped him, regarding his phallic emblem as the origin of the universe, and he viewed the identity of braahman with the universe si and m. ri. ae krishna in order to attain to mahaadeva krishna is the creator of everything the eternal krishna should be aed with sacrifices, etc. ashvatthaaman bowed unto rudra, regarded krishna as worthy of the highest regards, and became filled with delight, the marks whereof appeared on his body. bowing to vyaasa, he caused the army to be withdrawn, and so did also the paandavas. having fought for five days.. drona repaired to brahmaloka . arjuna met with vyaasa and inquired of him about the invisible person who aided him in the battle vyaasa said that it was mahaadeva himself, and recited a long enumeration of his attributes if mahaadeva becomes angry, neither nor as g raa even if they hide themselves in deep caves, can have peace. in days of yore mahaadeva destroyed the sacrifice of daksha the sacrifice fled away, and . and as. fell n and submitted to mahaadeva, the naagas and ri. became agitated, etc. pushan was eating the purodaasha shiva tore out his teeth the gods assigned to rudra a substantial share in sacrifices he then re established the sacrifice. then vyaasa related the destruction of tripura . he is rudra, etc. . explanation of some of the names of mahaadeva . blessings upon the reader, especially the readers of the shatarudriya .
naaraayaniya, adj. . b, .
narishyanta or narishyat, son of manu vaivasvata.
naaritirthaani, pl name of five tirthas .
narmadaa, a river, the present nerbudda . b . w by bathing in narmadaa and in the tirtha shurpaaraka, observing a fast during a fortnight, one becomes born as a prince, .
nartaka1, name of a weapon .
naasatya, name of one of the two ashvins . b, .
naasatya, adj. . b, e janmani ...brahmana
naastika, mostly pl .
naatakeya, pl a people .
naukarni, a matri. u, .
navaraashtra, name of a country .
navaraashtra, pl a people .
navatantu, son of vishvaamitra. b
naavyaashrama, name of a place .
nibida, v. nivida.
nicandra, an asura .
nicita, a river .
nishaa, wife of the fire bhaanu .
nishaacara, pl. = raakshasa, pl .
nishaacara, sg .
nishaakara2, a suparna, son of garuda.
nishatha1, a vrishni prince .
nishatha2, an ancient king .
nishciraa, v. nirvira.
nishcitaa, a river .
nishcyavana, a fire. .
nidhi, pl .
nidhipaala, pl .
nikharvata, a raakshasa .
nikumbha1, name of several asuras .
nikumbha2, a kuru warrior .
nikumbha3, a warrior of skanda. u, .
nila1, a serpent.
nila2, king of maahishmati . b, . nilaraajan.
nila3, a mountain . g, . i, . g, . nilaparvata.
nila4, a monkey .
nila5, a paandava warrior . nila2.
nila5, a kuru warrior .
nilaa, a river .
nilaparvata, a mountain. f, . nila2.
nilaayudha, pl a people .
nili, wife of ajamidha .
nilikaa, a river .
nimesha1, a naaga, accord. to nil a yaksha .
nimi1, an ancient king of the videhas . vaideha.
nimi2, son of dattaatreya and father of shrimat .
nimisha1, a suparna, son of garuda .
nipa, pl a tribe or family .
niraamarda, an ancient king .
niraamaya1, an ancient king .
niramitra1, son of nakula .
niramitra2, a trigarta prince .
niravinda, a sacred mountain. s, .
nirghantaka, v. naighantuka
nirmaanarata, pl a class of gods .
nirmocana, name of a city . c, .
nirriti1, a rudra .
nirriti2, a goddess .
niruddha, error in c. instead of aniruddha, q.v.
nirvira, a tirtha .
nirviraasangama, a tirtha .
nishada, v. nishadha2.
nishaada, pl name of low caste tribes . e the n. are wicked tribes who reside in hills and forests, . b, .
nishaada1, sg. . do. = ekalavva, .
nishaadaadhipati . do. = hiran yadhanus, .
nishadha1, son of the elder janamejaya .
nishadha2, an ancient king .
nishadha3, a mountain . d, . i, .
nishadha, pl a people and country nala...naanaam janaadhipaaanaam adhipatim nalamnalam naanaam adhipatimjambukh.among the peoples of bhaaratavarsha
nishaadi . a
nishangin, a son of dhritaraashtra .
nishatha, v. nishatha.
nishkriti, name of a fire .
nishkuta, a mountain .
nishkutikaa, a maatri. u, .
nishthaanaka, a serpent .
nishthurika, a serpent .
nisunda, an asura. b, .
nitambhu, a rishi .
nitha, a vrishni .
niti1 v. .
nivaaraa, a river .
nivaatakavaca, pl a tribe of asuras . d, . d, . g, .
one when the paarthas were thinking of arjuna, they saw indras chariot, driven by maatali, illuminating the sky, and arjuna descended and saluted each of them maatali also greeted and instructed them, and then returned in the chariot to indra. arjuna then gave to draupadi precious gems, etc presented to him by indra. then he related all as it had happened, and slept that night with the two sons of maadri . the next morning indra visited them under the sound of musical instruments, etc and blessed yudhishthira, and advised him to repair to kaamyaka. blessing upon the reader . when indra had gone, arjuna related his journey from kaamyaka, etc. . arjuna continued his narrative he passed the night after the meeting with the kiraata at that place, and in the morning he saw again the same brahman, and in the evening he had the visit of the lokapaalas the weapons that indra promised to teach him were those of vaayu, agni, the vasus, varuna, the maruts, the saadhya and paitaamaha weapons, those of the gandharvas, uragas, and raakshasas, and all the vaishnava and nairrita weapons in the chariot of indra, maatali wondered that arjuna was not jerked, though indra always himself gets jerked at the first pull by the steeds when he had learnt the weapons, indra said that now even the gods could not conquer him he had received knowledge of fifteen weapons with five modes of using them, viz. prayoga, upasamhaara, aavritti, praayashcitta, and pratighaata indra asked him, as his fee, to slay the nivaatakavacas, who were thirty millions in number and dwelt in the ocean, and gave him the chariot, upon which he had vanquished bali, shambara, bala, vritra, prahlaada, and naraka, and millions of daityas, and this diadem, and ornaments like his own, and the impenetrable mail, and fastened this durable string to the gaandiva, and the gods gave him the shell devadatta, through which indra had conquered the worlds . arjuna continued when he came to the ocean, he saw at a short distance the daitya city filled with daanavas. maatali drove the chariot with force, and the daanavas shut the gates. then arjuna blew the devadatta, and the nivaatakavacas appeared with iron javelins, maces, clubs, hatchets, sabres, discs, shataghnis, bhushundis, and swords, and sounded dissonant musical instruments. the devarshis, the daanavarshis, the brahmarshis, and the siddhas came to the battle . with arrows inspired with mantras relating to the brahman weapon, then with the maadhava weapon and the gaandiva arjuna killed innumerable nivaatakavacas, and the, horses yoked at the chariot conducted by maatali trampled upon them . arjuna reduced a shower of crags to powder by the mahendra weapon, then dried up showers of water by the weapon vishoshana, that he had acquired from indra then he annihilated fire by the water weapon, and by the stone weapon he repeatedly resisted the wind. then darkness enveloped the world the steeds turned away, maatali fell off, and the golden lash fell from his hand as maatali was stupefied, a terrible fear seized arjuna maatali said that he had conducted indras chariot in the battle for the sake of nectar, and in the battles with shambara, vritra, vairocani, etc but never had he lost his senses before. arjuna comforted maatali and repeatedly frustrated the magic of the enemy, and maatali again conducted the chariot. then on a sudden arjuna did not see the daanavas, who had become hidden by illusion . arjuna then fought with invisible weapons. then they withdrew the illusion and entered their city. the fallen and their weapons covered the ground so that the horses had to proceed in the sky. the nivaatakavacas remaining invisible, covered the welkin with crags others, entering into the earth, seized the legs of the horses and the wheels of the chariot. arjuna became distressed, but being advised by maatali, he applied the thunderbolt, inspiring the gaandiva with mantras, so that the arrows sent by the thunderbolt, becoming thunderbolts, penetrated the illusions and killed the nivaatakavacas. while the wives of daanavas were bewailing and at last fled to their palaces, arjuna and maatali entered the city, that was superior to that of the gods . maatali told him that this was originally the city of indra, but the gods had been driven away from it by the nivaatakavacas, who had through austerities gratified pitaamaha and obtained from him the boons, that they might reside here and be free from danger from the gods. when indra applied to svayambhu, he was told that he himself in another body should destroy them. as the gods were unable to slay them, indra had given those weapons to arjuna, so that he might destroy them, then arjuna and maatali again went to the abode of the gods . while returning he beheld a celestial city, moving at will, with trees of gems, etc with four gates, etc and maatali told him it was hiranyapura, made by brahmaan himself for the great asuras, the paulomas, and kaalakanjas, as the daiteyi pulomaa and the mahaasuri kaalakaa had by practising austerities for, celestial years obtained from svayambhu that their offspring should suffer little misfortune, be incapable of being killed by gods, and obtain an aรซrial, etc city, invincible even by the gods, maharshis, yakshas, gandharvas, pannagas, asuras, and raakshasas. brahmaan had destined that arjuna, a mortal, should kill them. therefore destroy them with the thunderbolt. a battle ensued the asuras resorted to illusion the city now entered into the earth, and now it rose upwards, etc. shot with the iron shafts of arjuna the city fell n. then they environed him in, chariots, etc. arjuna applied to rudra, and seeing a man with three heads, nine eyes, etc he applied the raudra weapon to the gaandiva when it had been hurled, there appeared forms of deer, lions, tigers, garudas, gandharvas, yakshas, asuras, guhyakas, nairritas, yaatudhaanas, etc by thousands. the daanavas, some of whom had three heads, some four tusks, etc were destroyed. arjuna again worshipped tripuraghna . maatali rejoiced and praised arjuna. the wives of the daanavas came out of the city bewailing the slain. maatali took arjuna to the abode of indra, and related in detail to indra arjunas achievement, and indra with the maruts praised him, and said that gods, daanavas, raakshasas, yakshas, asuras, gandharvas, birds, and serpents should not be able to resist him in fight, etc. . indra said that on the battlefield bhishma, drona, kripa, karna, shakuni, etc should not amount to part of arjuna. then indra gave him this golden garland, the shell devadatta, etc. . then indra told him to depart, and thus after five years come to you on the summit of this lower range of gandhamaadana . having promised that he should in the next morning show yudhishthira all the celestial weapons, arjuna passed that night there with all his brothers . the next morning, when arjuna was about to show the celestial weapons to yudhishthira, the earth trembled, etc. the brahmarshis, siddhas, maharshis, devarshis, gods, yakshas, raakshasas, gandharvas, etc pitaamaha, the lokaapaalas, and mahaadeva with his ganas appeared vaayu threw celestial garlands, sent by the gods, on arjuna, the gandharvas chanted ballads, and apsarases danced and sent by the gods naarada came and prevailed upon arjuna not to use the celestial weapons without necessity, as they would destroy the three worlds. then the gods, etc went whence they had come, and the paandavas pleasantly dwelt in that same forest with krishnaa .
nivida, a mountain in krauncadvipa .
niyata1, name of a fire .
niyataayus, a kuru warrior .
niyati, a goddess .
nriga, an ancient king . b, . kk, . b, .
nriparshi, pl .
nrisimha . d, . narasimha, naarasimha, adj.
nrityapriyaa, a maatri. u, .
nriyajna, a kind of sacrifice, .
nyagrodhaakhya, a tirtha .
odra, pl a people . udra, pl.
ogharakshas. c, .
ogharatha, son of oghavat2. b, .
oghavat1, a kuru warrior .
oghavat2, a king. b, .
oghavati, a river . i, . next.
oghavati, daughter of oghavat2 and wife of sudarshana. b, . prec.
oshadhi, pl. . bis, . do. = shiva .
paashaashini, v. palaashini.
paashcimaanupaka . cf .
paashin, a son of dhritaraashtra .
paashivaata, pl a people .
pashu1, pl a people .
pashu2, pl . do. = shiva .
pashubhumi, a country .
paashupata, adj. . d, . b, . b, . g, .
paashupataastra . the prec.
pashusakha, name of a shudra. b, .
paadapa, pl .
padaati, son of the elder janamejaya .
padma1, name of several serpents . b, .
padma2, an ancient king .
padma3, a treasure .
padma4, a warrior of skandar u, .
padma, name of a vyuha, .
padmaja, adj. . b, janma saptamam brahmana
padmajanman . b, . the prec.
padmaketana, a suparna, son of garuda .
padmanaabha2, a son of dhritaraashtra . sunaabha.
padmasambhava, adj. . b, .
padmasaras, name of a place .
pahlava, pl a people .
pahnava, pl a people, .
paishaaca, adj. . b, .. b, .
paishaaca, pl a people . pishaaca, pl.
paijavana, name of a shudra .
paila, a rishi . b, . b, .
pailagarga, a rishi .
painga, a muni .
paippalaadi, a brahman. b, .
paitaamaha, adj. . u, .
paitra, adj .
paitrya, adj .
paitrika, adj .
paaka, an asura .
pakshaalikaa, a maatri. u, .
pakshin, sg. and pl. = shiva .
paala, a serpent .
palaasha, pl a family .
palaashini, a river .
palaalaa, one of the mothers of shishu .
palita, name of a mouse. b, .
paalitaa, a maatri. u, .
pallava, pl v. pahlava, pl.
palvalaani, pl. = shiva .
paamshuraashtra, a country .
paamshuraashtra, pl a people .
pampaa, name of a lake . m, .
panasa, a monkey chief .
pancacudaa, an apsaras . rambhaa.
pancashikha, a muni. b, . b, . kaapileya.
. b bhishma said the mithilaa king janaka was always engaged in reflecting upon the courses of conduct that might lead to the attainment of braahman. one hundred preceptors always used to live in his palace. given to the study of the vedas, he was not very well satisfied with the speculations of his instructors on the character of the soul and their trines of extinction upon the dissolution of the body or of rebirth after death. once the great ascetic pancashikha kaapileya came to mithilaa, having roamed over the earth. he seemed to have assumed the form of that great ri. prajaapati, whom the saankhyas call kapila they say he was the first disciple of aasuri long living. he was performing a mental sacrifice for, years . he was fully con versant with the pancaraatra and the five sheaths that cover the soul, etc. he had approached one day a large concourse following the saankhya trine, and instructed them about the unmanifest aasuri had inquired of his preceptor and understood the distinction between the body and the soul, and had acquired celestial vision. for that assembly of ri aasuri made his exposition of braahman. pancashikha became a disciple of aasuri he lived on human milk he was accepted as a son by the braahmani kapilaa, the wife of aasuri, and used to suck her breasts. this was said to me by the holy one . janaka, abaning his preceptors, began to follow kaapileya upon the religion of emanci pation which is explained in saankhya treatises. some say that, when ignorance is destroyed by knowledge, the destruction of existence itself follows . the king became filled with wonder . continuation of the discourse between pancashikha and the king on the topic of existence and non existence after death. the mithilaa king, beholding his city burning in a conflagration, himself proclaimed, in this conflagration nothing of mine is burning. the king gave up his sorrows, etc. he who reads this discourse attains to emancipation .
pancaganga, pl name of a tirtha .
pancajana1, an asura .
pancajana2, v. pancanada.
paancajanya1, the conch of krishna. b, .
paancajanya2, name of a fire . . tapas.
pancaka, a companion of skanda. u, .
pancakarpata, pl a people .
pancaala, pl a people . paancaala, pl.
pancaala, sg v. paancaala, sg. . do2. = gaalava, . paancaala, sg. do. = shiva .
paancaala, sg. = dhrishtadyumna, .
paancaala, sg. = drupada, .
paancaala, sg. = satyajit, .
paancaala, sg. = gaalava . b, . pancaala, sg.
paancaalaka, adj. .
paancaalaputra, pl .
paancaalya1, a paancaala prince .
paancaalya1, name of tirtha .
pancami, a river .
pancanada . m, .
pancanada, adj. .
pancanada, pl a people . next.
paancanada, adj. .
pancaraatra, a literary work. b, . c, . b, .
pancasrotas, name of a place . b, .
pancavaktra, a warrior of skanda. u, .
pancavati, a tirtha .
pancavirya, a vishvadeva .
pancayakshaa, a tirtha .
. vyaasa said to drupada in days of yore, when the gods were celebrating a great sacrifice in the forest of naimisha, yama, holding the office of shamitri, did not slay the creatures, so that their numbers increased very greatly. soma, shakra, varuna, kubera, the saadhyas, the rudras, the vasus, the ashvins, etc complained thereof to prajaapati, who comforted them, saying that when the sacrifice was over yama would again sweep away the inhabitants of the earth. the gods then returned to the place of the sacrifice, and saw a golden lotus carried along the bhaagirathi. indra proceeded to the spot where the gangaa issues, and saw a beautiful woman, whose tears were being transformed into golden lotuses. she led him to mahaadeva, who as a handsome youth was seated with a young lady on a throne on one of the peaks of the himavat, playing dice. when indra spoke haughtily of himself, mahadeva caused shri to paralyse him and lead him into a hole, where four indras of old were confined in order to be reborn in the world of men, there to slay a large number of men, and then to regain the region of indra. their fathers should be dharma, vaayu, maghavat, and the ashvins, indra creating a person from himself to be the fifth among them. their names were vishvabhuj, bhutadhaaman, shibi, shaanti, and tejasvin. the weeping woman was appointed to be their common wife in the world of men. naaraayana, to whom ishaana and the five indras repaired, approved of every thing. the five indras were reborn as the paandavas, and shri as draupadi. a white hair of naaraayanas became bala deva, and a black krishna, after having entered the wombs of devaki and rohini. having related this to drupada, vyaasa granted him celestial sight, so that he beheld the paandavas endued with their former bodies. vyaasa then related to drupada the story of the damsel whom shankara, i.e. shiva, appointed to be in a future birth the wife of five husbands .
paandara, a serpent .
paandava, sg. = arjuna, .
paandava, sg. = bhimasena, .
paandava, sg. = janamejaya, .
paandava, sg. = nakula, .
paandava, sg. sahadeva, .
paandava, sg. = yudhishthira, .
paandava, adj camumsenaasainyamsenaamcamumsenaamsenaasenaamcamucamumsenaasenaamsainyamsenaamsenaamahaacamusainyamshriyam
paandavaanaam pravesha .
paandavapraveshaparvan . questioned by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related having obtained boons from dharma, yudhishthira returned to the hermitage and restored to the brahman his arani and mantha. then he asked arjuna to select some spot where they might dwell undiscovered. arjuna mentioned some countries surrounding the king of the kurus . yudhishthira chose the city of king viraata, who was attached to the paandavas. yudhishthira would introduce himself as a brahman named kanka, who was skilled in dice and had been the friend of yudhishthira . bhimasena as a cook and wrestler named vallava, who had served yudhishthira arjuna as a hermaphrodite, brihannalaa by name, who had served krishnaa as a waiting maid . nakula as a keeper of horses, named granthika, who had formerly been employed by yudhishthira sahadeva as a cowherd, named tantripaala krishnaa would serve sudeshnaa as a sairindhri, skilled in dressing hair, who had waited upon krishna . yudhishthira said let our priest, with our charioteers and cooks, repair to the abode of drupada and there maintain our agnihotra fires, and indrasena, etc with the empty chariots proceed to dvaaravati, and the maid servants go to the paancaalas, together with the charioteers and the cooks. let all of them say that the paandavas had left them at the dvaitavana lake. dhaumya advised the paandavas as to how they should behave at court and performed the rites ordained in respect of departure, and then set out for the paancaalas, taking with him their sacred fires indrasena, etc proceeded to the yaadavas . the paandavas then proceeded in the direction of the southern bank of the river kaalindi and passed through the countries of the yakrillomas and the shurasenas, leaving behind on the right the country of the paancaalas and on the left that of the dashaarnas. arjuna carried krishnaa. when they had reached the capital of viraata, arjuna, as gaandiva was known to all men, caused them to stow away their weapons in a shami tree near a cemetery. nakula ascended the tree and tied the weapons fast. in the tree they hung up a corpse and said to the inquirers this is our mother, aged years. they kept for themselves the names jaya, jayanta, vijaya, jayatsena, jayadbala . yudhishthira praised durgaa, who then showed herself to him and promised him victory, etc. . they then entered the city and were successively received by viraata. yudhishthira was accepted as a courtier . bhimasena was accepted as a cook and a wrestler . krishnaa was seen by the queen sudeshnaa kaikeyi and accepted as a sairindhri she said my five husbands, who are gandharvas and sons of a gandharva king, always protect me . sahadeva came clad in a cowherds dress and speaking the dialect of cowherds, and said that he was a vaishya named arishtanemi. he was accepted as the kings head cowherd . then arjuna appeared dressed as an eunuch and naming himself brihannalaa, and was accepted as a dancing master . nakula, who named himself granthika, like wise was accepted as the kings head horsekeeper .
paandaveya, pl. = paandava, pl .
paandaveya, sg. = abhimanyu, .
paandaveya, sg. = arjuna, .
paandaveya, sg. = bhimasena, .
paandaveya, sg. = janamejaya, .
paandaveya, sg. = nakula, .
paandaveya, sg. = parikshit, .
paandaveya, sg. = yudhishthira, .
paandaveya, adj .
paandaviya, adj .
. when gaandhaari had been with child a full year kunti invoked dharma, who came seated on his chariot. she brought forth yudhishthira . similarly the birth of bhimasena and arjuna are related in full then kunti refused to have any more sons . birth of nakula and sahadeva celestial voice. the rishis on shatashringa gave the sons of paandu names. they were born at intervals of one year from one another. they became great favourites of the rishis and their wives, dwelling on shatashrnga . kunti refused to help madri to get more children, as she had been deceived by her having two sons at once .
pandita1, a son of dhritaraashtra . panditaka.
paandodraraajau, v. paandyaraaja.
paandu, son of vyaasa by ambaalikaa, the wi of vicitravirya husband of kunti and maadri and father of the five paandavas . p. then at the command of dhritaraashtra offered his wealth to bhishma, satyavati, kausalyaa, vidura, etc and with the wealth acquired by him dhritaraashtra performed horse sacrifices. with kunti and maadri he became a permanent inhabitant of the woods, addicted to hunting on the southern slope of the himaalaya, supplied with every object of pleasure and enjoyment at the command of dhritaraashtra, . the muni kindama inflicted a curse on p agastya, . p. declared that he would lead the life of a brahmacaarin according to the aaranyashaastras, and send his attendants to haastinapura to inform bhishma, etc and with his wives, protected by mahaabhutas, siddhas, and paramarshis, he traversed the mountain of naagashata, caitraratha, kaalakuta, himavat, gandhamaadana, indradyumnasaras, and hamsakuta then he practised ascetic austerities on shatashringa, . p. became dear to the siddhas, caaranas, and rishis, and like to a brahmarshi. on the new moon day when the maharshis assembled in order to partake of a great gathering of gods, rishis, and pitris in the abode of brahmaan, p. wanted to accompany them with his wives from shatashringa to the north, but they told him that the princesses could not ascend the king of mountains, where they had seen the retreats of gods, gandharvas, and apsarases, and the gardens of kubera, where only vaayu and the siddhas and the para marshis could go. as he complained of being childless, they told him to let somebody else raise offspring for him. p.s conversation with kunti. p. quoted the words of manu svaayambhuva and the example of shaaradandaayani, . kunti in reply alleged the pauraanic narrative of vyushitaashva and entreated paandu to beget children by his ascetic power, . p. said that women formerly were not bound to adhere faithfully to their husband, and were not regarded sinful when yielding to their desire that practice was applauded by the maharshis, and even now prevailed among birds and beasts and among the uttara kurus. it was the muni shvetaketu who established the now existing practice . p. further alleged the example of madayanti and of vyaasa, . kunti related to paandu how she had obtained the mantra from durvaasas p. told her to invoke dharma, . p. died in accordance with the curse inflicted on him by kindama . kunti wished to be burnt together with him, but this maadri did not allow, and herself ascended the funeral pyre, . the ascetics took kunti, the children, and the two corpses to haastinapura. hearing of the arrival of thousands of caaranas and munis, people soon after sunrise began to come out from the city to see, together with bhishma, somadatta, baahlika, the blind raajarshi, the kshattri vidura, satyavati, kausalyaa, gaandhaari, accompanied by the other ladies of the royal household, and the sons of dhritaraashtra. it was seventeen days after the death of p. . the rishis, etc suddenly disappeared like a fata morgana, . dhritaraashtra caused vidura to celebrate the funeral ceremonies of p. and maadri on the bank of the gangaa, . bhaarata, bharatarshabha, bharatasattama, kaurava, kauravanandana, kauravarshabha, kauravya, kauravyadaayaada, kausalyaananda vardhana, kurudvaha, kurukulodvaha, kurunandana, kuru pati, kurupravira, naagapuraadhipa, naagapurasimha.
paandu2, son of the elder janamejaya .
paandu, pl. = paandava, pl .
paandudaayaada, pl. = paandava, pl .
paandudaayaada, sg. = bhimasena
. after some time bhishma went to the capital of the madra king shalya, and according to the custom observed in that family and ordained by svayambhu himself, he obtained his sister maadri for paandu by giving great riches, and took her to haastinapura, where the nuptials were celebrated on an auspicious day and muhurta. after thirty days paandu started on his conquest of the world, and conquered the dashaarnas, slew the magadha king dirgha in raajagriha then going into mithilaa he defeated the videhas then the kaashis, suhmas, and pundras, etc and after having made all kings the vassals of the kurus, he returned laden with much wealth to haastinapura, where people said they who before robbed the kurus of both territory and wealth, have been made to pay tribute by paandu .
paandukumaara, pl. = paandava, pl .
paandunandana1, pl. = paandava, pl .
paandunandana, = bhimasena, .
paandupurvaja, v. paandu1.
paanduputra, pl. = paandava, pl .
paandura, a warrior of skanda. u, .
. upon the birth of those three children, kurujaangala, kurukshetra, and the kurus grew in prosperity, etc. the southern kurus, in virtuous rivalry with the northern kurus, walked about in the company of gods, rishis, and caaranas. virtuously ruled by bhishma, the king was aned with hundreds of caityas and yupas. dhritaraashtra, paandu, and vidura were brought up by bhishma as if they were his own children, and became well exercised in archery, etc and well read in the itihaasas and puraanas and various sciences, and the vedas and vedaangas. paandu excelled all men in archery, dhritaraashtra in personal strength, vidura in devotion to virtue. haastinapura was the foremost among cities. because of dhritaraashtras blindness and viduras being a paarasava, paandu became king. one day bhishma addressed vidura .
paanduraashtra, pl v. paamshuraashtra, pl.
paandusaupaaka, name of a caste .
paandusuta1, pl. = iandava, pl .
paandutanaya1, pl. = paandava, pl .
paandya1, pl a people and their country .
paandya2, two or more kings . c, . paandyaraaja, paandyaraashtraadhipa.
paandya3, the country of the paandyas .
paandya4, adj. .
paanika, a companion of skanda. u, .
paanikhaata, name of a tirtha .
paanikurcan, a warrior of skanda. u, .
paanimat, v. animat.
paanitaka, a companion of skanda. u, .
pankadigdhaanga, a warrior of skanda. u, .
pankajit, a suparna, son of garuda, .
pannaga1, pl .
pannaga, sg . names of single pannagas arbuda, . shakravaapin, . shesha, . shrivaha, . kauravya, . nahusha, . padma, . sumukha, . takshaka, . vaasuki, .
pannagi, . do. = ulupi, .
paapaharaa, a river .
para, an ancient king .
paraa, a goddess .
paraa, a river .
paaraa, another name of the river kaushiki .
paraashara1, a rishi, son of shakti and adrishyanti, and father of vyaasa . then adrishyanti in the hermitage of vasishtha brought forth a son, paraashara, who knew vasishtha as his father. adrishyanti, however, told him that his father had been devoured by a raakshasa. p. then in his anger resolved to destroy the whole creation, but was restrained by vasishtha, . b, . b, . b, . shaaktra, shaktre putra, shaaktreya, shaktrija, shaktriputra.
paraashara2, a serpent .
paaraasharya, one or two rishis of paraasharas race .
paarashava, name of a caste, . paarasava.
parashu, an ancient king .
raama, v. raama1.
parashuvana, name of a hell .
paarada, pl a people .
parahan, an ancient king .
paraakrama, a kuru warrior .
parakraathin, a kuru warrior .
paramakrodhin, a vishvadeva .
parameshthin5, son of ajamidha .
paarameshthya, adj. . paara meshtha.
paraanta, pl a people .
paarasava, said of vidura, . paarashava.
paarasavi, said of the wife of vidura, the daughter of king devaka, .
paarasika, pl a people .
paratangana, pl a people .
paraavaha, name of a wind. n the wind which takes away the lives of the creatures, whose track is followed by mrityu and vaivasvata, which leads yogins to immortality, by whose aid the ten thousand sons of daksha attained to the ends of the universe, by whose touch one becomes emancipated and never returns, that wind is called by the name of p .
paraavasu, a brahman, son of raibhya and brother of arvaavasu . b, . c, .
paaraavata, a serpent .
paaribarha, a suparna, son of garuda .
paaribhadraka, pl a people .
parishruta, name of two warriors of skanda. u, .
paridvipa, v. sariddvipa.
parigha1, a companion of skanda. u, .
parigha2, name of a candaala. b, .
paarijaata1, a serpent .
paarijaata2, a rishi .
paarijaata3, pl . do .
paarijaataka, a muni .
parikshit or parikshit, son of abhimanyu and uttaraa, and father of janamejaya . one day king p the son of abhimanyu, when hunting, having pierced a deer lost sight of it. he then asked the muni shamika, but received no answer as the muni was then observing the vow of silence in anger the king then placed upon the munis shoulder a dead snake and returned to his capital haastinapura. of this the munis son shringin was informed in a quarrel by his companion krisha, and then cursed p saying that within seven nights he should be stung to death by takshaka. the muni was not pleased with the curse, as p. properly protected his subjects . therefore he sent his disciple gauramukha to inform p who became very repentant and sorrowful. a mansion was erected upon a solitary column and well guarded. the seventh day the brahman kaashyapa was coming desirous of curing the king. takshaka in the shape of an old brahman met with kaashyapa . as kaashyapa revived a banyan which had been reduced to ashes by being bitten by takshaka, takshaka gave to kaashyapa more wealth than what he expected from p and having ascertained by means of yoga that p.s span of life was at an end, kaashyapa retired. takshaka went to haastinapura, and hearing that p. was protected by poison neutralizing mantras and medicines, he caused some serpents in the guise of ascetics to present the king with kusha grass, water, and fruits, in one of which he himself was concealed as a tiny ugly insect. as such he appeared when p. was eating the fruit. p. said the sun is setting, to day have no more fear from poison therefore let this insect becoming takshaka bite me so that the words of the ascetic may be rendered true. then he placed the insect on his neck and was bitten by takshaka, who coiled round his neck and uttered a tremens roar, . the ministers of janamejaya told him about p that he was virtuous, a pupil of shaaradvata in the science of arms and dear to govinda, and that he had got his name because he was born by uttaraa, parikshineshu kurushu, and that he ruled sixty years that being addicted to hunting he made over all affairs of state to his ministers then how he insulted shamika, and his death they also mentioned that takshaka had insulted the rishi uttanka, . abhimanyo suta, abhimanyuja, bharatashreshtha, kirititanayaatmaja, kuru shreshtha, kurukulaadhama, kurunandana, kururaaja, kuru vardhana, paandaveya.
parikshit2 or parikshit, son of avikshit .
parikshit3 or parikshit, a king of ayodhyaa.
parikshit, son of anashvan .
paaripaatra or paariyaatra, a mountain . b, . g, .
paariplava, a tirtha .
paarishada, mostly pl said of the followers of shiva and skanda, .
parivaha, name of a wind. m the wind who bears the celestial waters and supports the celestial gangaa, who causes the sun with its thousand rays to appear as a luminous body of only one ray, and who causes the moon to increase after his waning, that wind is named p.
parivyaadha, a rishi .
paariyaatra, v. paaripaatr.
parjanya2, a devagandharva .
paarjanya, adj. . next.
parnaashaa, a river . b, .
parnashaalaa, name of a village .
parnaada, name of one or more brahmans .
paarshada, v. parshvada.
paarshata, pl the sons of drupada .
paarshati, the queen of drupada . prishati.
paarshnikshemasamuha, a vishvadeva .
parvana, a raakshasa, .
parvaanukramani, the first of the minor parvans of the mhbhr. . anukramani.
parvasangraha, . do. = parvasangrahaparvan .
the second of the minor parvans parvasangraha. sauti related raama, having in the intervals between the tretaa and dvaapara yugas repeatedly destroyed the warrior caste, formed five lakes of blood at samantapancaka, where he offered oblations of blood to the manes of his ancestors, until those pacified him, and his lakes became holy tirthas . sauti explained the term akshauhini and its subdivisions. eighteen akshauhinis partook of the battle bhishma holding the command for ten days, drona for five, karna for two, shalya for half a the combat between bhima and duryodhana lasting half a and the nightly assault of drauni, haardikya, and gautama on yudhishthiras army taking place at the end of the same day. sauti enumerated the smaller parvans, or greater chapters, together with the three parvans of harivamsha . sauti enumerated the eighteen books or greater parvans, with harivamsha as the nineteenth, with a summary of their contents, a computation of the number of verses, and renewed praises .
parvata1, a devarshi, son of naaradas sister, often mentioned together with gandharvas . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . next.
parvata2, a gandharva .
paarvata, adj. .
parvatavaasin, pl a people .
paarvateya, a king .
paarvatiya1, pl a people .
paarvatiya2, adj. .
paarvatiya3, a prince .
paashaanatirtha, name of a vedi .
pataccara, pl a people .
pataccarahantri, name of a prince . next.
pataccaranihantri, name of a prince . the prec.
pataakin, a kuru warrior .
paataala, a region under the earth, the abode of the asuras in the world of the naagas . b, . b, . bis, . c, . b, . b, .
patalaavati, a river .
patana, a raakshasa .
patavaasaka, a serpent .
pathavaasaka, v. patavaasaka.
patatri, a kuru warrior .
pativrataanaam lokaa, .
. asked by yudhishthira, maarkandeya related, on account of krishnaa the madra king ashvapati, the husband of maalavi, was old and childless. after eighteen years of vows and offerings to saavitri, saavitri granted him a boon he asked for many sons, but was promised a daughter. she was called saavitri. as nobody asked her in marriage, she was sent to look for a husband herself . she chose satyavat, the son of the shaalva king dyumatsena, who had been blinded and deprived of his king and lived as an ascetic in the forest. satyavat equalled rantideva saankrti, shibi aushinara, yayaati, etc but naarada said within a year of this day he will die then naarada went to heaven . after her marriage saavitri dressed in bark garments, etc. . she counted the days, and having ascertained that her husband would die on the fourth day following, she observed a triraatra vow on the fourth day all the ascetics uttered benedictions that she should never suffer wihood she would not eat before the sun set. she followed satyavat as he, taking his axe, set out for the woods . he fell ill and slept with his head on her lap. yama himself and not his emissary came with a noose in his hand and pulled out of the body of satyavat a person of the size of a thumb, bound it in the noose and proceeded in a southern direction. saavitri followed him and was granted five boons that her father in law should attain his eye sight and be strong that her father in law should regain his king and never fall off from his duties that her father should have sons that she and satyavat should have sons begotten from both of us that satyavat should be restored to life and live years. yama untied the noose she went back to the corpse and placed his head on her lap. satyavat regained his consciousness. he was anxious about his parents, and they returned to the hermitage . meanwhile dyumatsena had regained his sight, but was anxious at not finding satyavat. he was comforted by the brahmans suvarcas, gautama, bharadvaaja, daalbhya, apastamba, and dhaumya. a little while afterwards satyavat and saavitri reached the hermitage. saavitri narrated every thing that had happened and was praised by the rishis . meanwhile the enemy of dyumatsena had been slain by his minister, and dyumatsena then again became king of the shaalvas. saavitri after a long time gave birth to sons, and her father also got sons by maalavi. so also krishnaa will rescue ye all. yudhishthira and his brothers continued to live in the kaamyaka forest .
pativrataayaa aakhyaana .
pativrataayaa maahaatmya saavitryaa .
and . questioned by yudhishthira about the virtue of women, maarkandeya, saying that the work of a mother is more difficult than that of a father, and that for women neither sacrifices nor shraaddhas nor fasts are of any efficacy, but that they can win heaven only by serving their husbands, related when the brahman kaushika, who had studied the vedas and the upanishads, was reciting the vedas under a tree, a female crane befouled his body, and looked upon with anger by kaushika fell to the ground. kaushika regretted his angry deed. when he had entered a village in order to procure alms, in a certain house the wife first served her husband, who came home tired and hungry, with food, etc and then began to conciliate the angry kaushika, who blamed her for exalting her husband above the brahmans. she said that she was no she crane, that she knew that the ocean had been made brackish and undrinkable by the wrath of the brahmans, that the fire of their wrath had not to this day been extinguished in the forest of dandaka, but that she regarded her husband as her supreme god, and deserved forgiveness, that anger is a foe to men within themselves, and that the gods know him to be a brahman who has abaned anger and passion, etc. and who, though himself injured, never returns the injury, etc that virtue is difficult to understand, but must be based on truth the ancients have declared that virtue depends on shruti, but it is variously defined and subtle to be understood thou art cognisant of virtue and studiest the vedas but think, however, that thou t not know what virtue really is a fowler in mithilaa will discourse to thee on virtue. kaushika blessed her, and returned to his abode, reproaching himself . he set out for mithilaa, ruled over by janaka, and found out the fowler, who was seated in a butchers yard, selling venison and buffalo meat to a large crowd of buyers but he at once went to kaushika, and proving that he knew why he had come, he led him to his abode, where he honoured him duly, and explained to him that, notwithstanding his cruel trade, which he had inherited from his sires and grandsires, and which belonged to his caste by birth, he led a virtuous life, serving his superiors and old people, speaking truth, never envying others, giving to the best of his power, etc. in the king of janaka there did not exist a single subject that did not follow the duties of his caste. he did not slay the boars and buffaloes himself, nor did he eat meat himself he fasted during the day and ate in the night even though the behaviour of his order be bad, a person may yet be himself of good behaviour so also a person may become virtuous, although he may by profession be a slayer of animals. it is the fault of the kings when the subjects decay, and monsters, dwarfs, etc are produced, but janaka ruled justly. if one repents a wrong e by him, he is delivered from his sin . if a man seeks redemption after having committed a sin, he becomes purified of all his sins . it is temptation that constitutes the basis of sin. then he gave some advice as to what is virtuous conduct . the fowler and the animals slain by him are driven by their karman in a former life. in days of yore, animals and, cows used to be killed every day in the kitchen of king rantideva at the caaturmaasya animals are sacrificed the shruti says, the fires are fond of meat, and at the sacrifices animals are killed by the regenerate, and these animals are purged of sin, and by mantras go to heaven. regarding animal food this rule has been laid n by munis whoever partakes of animal food after having first offered it duly and respectfully to the gods and the pitris, is not polluted by the act. the shruti says, such a man is not one who partakes of animal food, and a brahman who has intercourse with his wife during her season is a brahma caarin. king saudaasa, under the influence of a curse, ate human flesh. agriculture is considered to be praiseworthy, though the plough destroys many creatures. seeds of rice, etc are all living creatures. as to hunting and the cutting of trees and herbs, many creatures live in trees and fruits and water. the earth and the air are all swarming with living organisms, which are unconsciously destroyed by men from mere ignorance . when life is at stake and in the matter of marriage, it is justified to tell an untruth. whichever conduces most to the good of all creatures is considered to be truth . the fowler discoursed upon the influence of karman upon metempsychosis and salvation . questioned by kaushika about the senses, the fowler discoursed about the sinful . the virtuous man discerns these evils by means of his spiritual insight . then he shortly enumerated the elements of the braahmi vidyaa
patrorna, pl a people .
pattana, name of a city .
patti, pl a people .
patusha, a raakshasa .
paudanya, a city .
paulastya4, pl. .
paulastya5, adj. .
pauloma1, adj. = paulomaparvan .
pauloma2, a tirtha .
pauloma3, pl a tribe of asuras . d, . d, . next.
pauloman, pl. = pauloma, pl .
the fourth of the minor parvans. sautis conversation, in the forest of naimisha, with the rishis at the twelve years sacrifice of shaunaka . shaunakas lineage from brahmaan through bhrigu, cyavana, prcmati, ruru, and shunaka was related to him by sauti. pulomaa. pramad varaa. from this time ruru made a vow to destroy the serpents, and whenever he saw a serpent he always killed it. sahasrapad directed ruru to ascertain the facts about the serpent sacrifice of janamejaya and the deliverance of the serpents by aastika ruru, having come home, asked his father, who related all about the story
paundra2, the conch shell of bhimasena .
paundra3, pl a people . paundrika, pl pundra, pl.
paundramaatsyaka, a king .
pauraana, adj. .
paurandara, adj. .
pauraanika, adj .
paurava1, pl. . pauravaka, pl.
paurava7, one or more kings at the time of yudhishthira . paurava2, pauraveshvara.
paurava8, an ancient king of the angas . king p. also had died description of his horse sacrifices and his gifts to brahmans versed in shikshaa and akshara, whom he diverted by actors and dancers and singers gaathaas in praise of p. are sung by those who are acquainted with the history of the past, . brihadratha7, anga4.
paurava9, adj. .
paurika, a prince .
paururavasa, adj. .
paurusha, adj. . c, . b, .
paushti, wife of puru .
paushya1, a kshatriya .
paushya3, adj. .
the third of the minor parvans of mhbhr. when janamejaya, the son of parikshit, with his brothers shrutasena, ugrasena, and bhimasena was attending his long sacrifice at kurukshetra, his brothers beat an offspring of saramaa. saramaa then cursed them, saying that evil should come upon them unexpectedly. janamejaya then returned to haastinapura and began to search for a purohita who might neutralize the curse one day when hunting he obtained for this purpose somashravas, son of the rishi shruta shravas and a serpent somashravas would grant to any brahman whatever might be demanded of him. janamejaya then conquered takshashilaa. about this time there was a rishi named aayoda dhaumya, with three disciples, upamanyu, aaruni paancaalya, and veda. upamanyu . veda . utanka .
paavaka2, pl a class of rishis .
paavakaashani, v. paakashaasani.
paavana1, a tirtha .
paavana2, a vishvadeva .
. b bhishma said there was a lordly shaalmali tree on the himavat. one day naarada praised it, saying that pavana must be its friend and protector, since he spared it, though he eradicates the tallest and strongest trees . the shaalmali said that the wind was not its friend, but that it was stronger itself than the wind. naarada warned him, saying that the wind was stronger than even indra, etc. . informed by naarada, the wind came and rebuked the shaalmali tree, saying that he had spared it because brahmaan, while creating the world, had for a time rested under it. the shaalmali laughed and challenged the wind to show his power, which the wind threatened to next day. when night came the shaalmali reflected that all that it had said to naarada was false, that it was in reality weaker than other trees, and inferior in might to the wind but in intelligence no tree is my equal . the shaalmali then caused all its branches to be cut off. the wind smiled the shaalmali felt great shame, and, remembering the words of naarada, repented greatly of his folly.
. b bhishma said the haihaya king arjuna kaartavirya, with, arms, became the lord of the whole of this world in maahishmati he gave large gifts to dattaatreya, who granted him four boons that he should have, arms in battle, but only two at home that he should subjugate the whole earth righteously, and sway her with vigilance and that whenever he might happen to go wrong, the righteous should set him right. a. now regarded himself as having no equal. a celestial voice said that the brahman is superior to the kshatriya a. maintained that the brahmans take refuge with the kshatriyas what the virgin gaayatri had said from the sky was not true . shall bring the skin clad brahmans under my subjection. at these words of a. the invisible goddess became agitated . then vaayu warned a addressing him from the air. asked by a. what kind of earthly creature the brahman is, if he resembles the wind, water, fire, sun, or sky, vaayu praised the brahmans above all, citing kashyapa, angiras, gautama, aurva, and dattaatreya even agni and brahmaan are brahmans the large king of the dandakas was destroyed by a brahman the ocean, that was full of crystal water, cursed by the brahmans, became saline in taste. arjuna remained silent . vaayu repeated the story of kashyapa in detail, and asked arjuna if he knew a kshatriya superior to kashyapa. arjuna remained silent. then vaayu related the story of utathya . arjuna remained silent. vaayu then described the greatness of agastya . arjuna remained silent. vaayu related a feat of vasishthas . arjuna remained silent. vaayu related a feat of atris . arjuna remained silent. vaayu related a feat of cyavanas . arjuna remained silent. vaayu related the history of the kapas . arjuna praised the brahmans, mentioning dattaatreya. vaayu told him always to protect them a terrible danger threatens thee from the bhrigus that will take place after a time .
pavanasya hrada, a tirtha .
pavitraa, a river .
pavitrapaani, a rishi .
payasya, son of angiras. b, .
payodaa, a maatri. u, .
payoshni, a river . c the river p. was aned by the vidarbha king, and its waters were mixed with soma juice, . b here king nriga gratified indra by offering soma. here the gods with indra and the prajaapatis performed sacrifices. here king gaya aamurtaraayasa satisfied indra with soma in seven horse sacrifices, where all the articles, which else are made of wood or earth, were of gold. seven sets of these articles were prepared by him, and at the top of each sacrificial stake seven rings were fastened the gods themselves with indra erected the sacrificial stakes. indra became delighted with soma and the brahmans with the dakshinaas, which were innumerable as the sand grains, the stars, or the raindrops. gaya presented the brahmans with golden cows made by vishvakarman, so numerous were his caityas that but little space was left on the earth. thus gaya attained to the worlds of indra he who bathes in the p. attains to the same, .
phalakaksha, a yaksha .
phalakivana, a tirtha .
phalgu, name of a tirtha or of a river . phalgutirtha.
phalguni, sg dual, or pl name of two nakshatras .
phalgutirtha, name of a tirtha . phalgu.
phalodaka, a yaksha .
phenapa, subst. and adj .
picchala, a serpent.
picchalaa, a river .
pishaaca, pl a class of beings, also name of a people . b, . d, in the palace of indravaishravanasabhaav.worship kubera in his palacebrahmasabhaav.worship brahmaan in his palacebrahmashiraskairaatap.ditija psudanam...gaandivamnalopaakhyaanap.oraga raakshasaantirthayaatraap.bhuta yaksha paash ca, worship shiva at gokarnanivaatakavacayuddhap.aajagarap.skanpattion the mountain shvetaskanaakhyaanaaanaam ganai, surround skandamanushyagrahak.v. paishaaca2skandayuddhaaanaam asankhyeyaa ganaa.aanaam ganai, surround skandajayadrathavimokshanap.oraga maanu shaan, created by the maharshisraamopaakhyaanap.raakshasaa purushaadaash ca paash ca, made raavana their kingsitaa raavanas.caturdasha paanaam kanyaa, wives of raavanaraama raavanayuddhaganaan...p kshudra rakshasaamaanaam, sc. balai, follow raavanabhagavadgitaap.yaksha raksha pebhyabhishmavadhap.oraga raakshasaaa people in the army of yudhi shthiraoraga raakshasaa, praise arjunaraakshasaash ca paash caanye pishitaashanaa.a people in the army of duryodhanadronaabhishekap.a people that had been vanquished by krishnaabhi manyuvadhap.sanghaadrink bloodpratijnaap.oraga raakshasaajayadrathavadhap.nrityat preta paadyair bhutaakirnaam, sc. nadimnishaacara shva vrika pmodanam mahitalam, i.e. the battle fieldghatotkacavadhap.siddha gandharva psanghaa, praised ashvatthaamanoraga raakshasaighoradarshanai, yoked to the chariot of alambushayuktam gajanibhair vaahai pvadanai kharai, sc. the chariot of ghatotkacaassisted ghatotkacanaaraayanaastramokshap.naaraayananaaga raksha paankarnap.raksha paash ca, on the battle fieldgaruda psayaksha raakshasaan, vanquished by arjuna in the khaandava forestraksha paash ca, protect himavativaoraga raakshasaa, present at the encounter between karna and arjunasided with karnashankhatirthain shankhatirthaaadityatirthain aadityatirthagadaayuddhaap.aanaam...antarikshe mahaanadasauptikap.page5 b rakshaamsi paash ca...khaadanto naramaamsaane pibanta shonitaani castrivilaapap.raajadh.yaksha raksha paanaammokshadh.vattulaadhaara jaajalisamv.mokshadh.sg. = pishaa copahata, nil.vatjvarotpattidaksha yajnavinaashaoraga raakshasaaoraga raakshasaidakshaprokta shivasahasra naamastotramokshadh.sa caarana pe, sc. trailokyeshukaa bhipatanaoraga raakshasaanaanushaasanik.brahmaadaya pishaacaantaa... devaaupamanyupreta pyoaanushaasanik.suparna gandharva p daanavaaoraga raakshasaa kinnaraanaamyaatudhaanaa paash ca lumpanti tad dhavidakshinaaumaa maheshvarasamv.on himavataanushaasanik.sg.munjavatworship shiva on munjavatgurushishyasamv.oraga rakshasaam...ishvara prabhuaasura raakshasaaputradarshanap.had been reborn as warriors of the great battle
pishaaca2, name of a yaksha .
pishanga, a serpent .
pishitaasha, pl. = raakshasa, pl .
pishitaashana, sg. = ghatotkaca, .
pishitaashin, pl. = raakshasa, pl .
pinaaka, the staff or bow of shiva . b, . g, . b, .
pinaakin1, a rudra .
pindaara, a serpent . next.
pindaaraka1, a serpent .
pindaaraka2, a vrishni .
pindaaraka3, a tirtha . y, .
pindasektri, a serpent .
pingaakshi, names of two maatris. u, .
pingala1, a serpent .
pingala2, names of two brahmans .
pingala3, a yaksha king .
pingalaa, a courtesan .
pingalaka, a yaksha .
pingatirtha, a tirtha .
pingaayaa aashrama, a tirtha. y, .
pinjalaa, a river .
pinjaraka, a serpent .
pippalaada, a rishi .
pitaamaha, pl. = pitri, pl .
pitaamahasaras, name of one or more tirthas . next.
pitaamahasya saras, name of one or more tirthas . q, . the prec.
pitha, an asura . b, .
pithara, an asura .
pitharaka, a serpent .
pitri, pl .
pitrigraha, the pitri demon .
pitrilokarshi, pl .
pitrinaam aashrama, name of a tirtha. q, .
pitrirupa, a rudra .
pitrya, adj .
plakshajaata, adj said of the river sarasvati, .
plakshaprasravana, name of a tirtha .
plakshaavatarana, a tirtha . d p. is situated on the yamunaa, and is the entrance to the region of heaven there the paramarshis had performed sacrifices of the saarasvata kind their king bharata let loose the horse for his horse sacrifice there marutta, assisted by the rishi samvarta, performed excellent sacrifices, .
plakshaavataranagamana . lomasha pointed out to yudhi shthira the spots where sacrifices had been performed by prajaapati, ambarisha naabhaaga, the saarvabhauma yayaati naahusha the r of kurukshetra the shami tree, which had got only a single leaf the lakes of parashu raama the hermitage of naaraayana the path of ricikas son in the river raupyaa further, that a pishaaca woman with pestles for her ornaments had said having eaten curd in yugandhara, and lived in acyutasthala, and bathed in bhutilaya, thou shouldst live with thy sons, etc. the tirtha plakshaavatarana. having taken his bath on this spot one becomes able to behold all the worlds and is purified from his evil deeds. the paandavas having bathed, yudhishthira beheld all the worlds and arjuna . daksha, when engaged in a sacrifice there, had blessed the spot, saying those men that die on this spot shall win a place in heaven. lomasha pointed out to yudhishthira the sarasvati, the oghavati, vinashana, cama sodbheda, the tirtha of sindhu, prabhaasa, vishnupada, vipaashaa, kaashmiramandala, the gate of maanasa, a gap opened by raama in the midst of this mountain. vaatikakhanda, on the north of videha, yonder lake, where people propitiate shiva with sattras in the month of caitra, and become free from sins, ujjaanaka, the lake kushavat with a lotus in the kusha grass, and the hermitage of rukmini, bhrigutunga, vitastaa, the holy rivers jalaa and upajalaa, where indra and agni tested king ushinara .
plakshavati, a river .
potaka, a serpent .
potimatsaka, a king . paundramaatsyaka.
prabaahu, a kuru warrior .
prabaalaka, v. pravaalaka.
prabhaa, a goddess .
prabhaa, an apsaras. b, .
prabhadraka, pl mostly said of a division of the paancaalas .
prabhaakara2, name of a varsha in kushadvipa . do see prabhaaraka.
prabhanjana, a king . do. = vaayu, q.v.
prabhaaraka, a serpent .
prabhaasa1, one of the vasus .
prabhaasa2, a tirtha . b, . e p. is the favoured spot of indra and removes all sins, . b, . b, tirtham, = hiranyasaras, origin of the name, pushkaracaandaalikaashramashapathavidhiin the westgolokaaanushaasanik.anugitaap.near dvaaravatimausalap.there the vrishnis met with destruction
prabhaasa3, a warrior of skanda. u, .
prabhaasa4, pl a sort of rishis .
prabhaasotpattikathana . daksha had twenty seven daughters, married to soma, connected with the several constellations serving to help men in calculating time, all beautiful rohini, however, was the foremost in beauty. as soma lived long with rohini, his other wives complained to daksha, who got them reconciled. as soma, however, still continued to live with rohini exclusively, his other wives once more approached daksha, who now threatened to curse him. his threats were not, however, heeded, and when the wives complained a third time, daksha cursed soma, so that he was affected with phthisis. his sacrifices, etc were in vain the herbs became tasteless and failed to grow, etc. the gods prevailed upon daksha to withdraw the curse on condition that soma should behave equally towards all his wives, and bathe in the tirtha where the sarasvati mingles with the ocean, and ae mahaadeva there then he should during the one half of the month wane every day and during the other wax every day. bathing there on the day of new moon, he was restored. daksha told soma not to disregard women and brahmans. prabhaasa became the foremost of all tirthas soma bathes there on every recurring day of the new moon and regains his form and beauty thence comes its name prabhaasa, because soma there regained his effulgence .
prabhaavati, name of a female ascetic .
prabhaavati, the wife of surya .
prabhaavati, a maatri. u, .
prabhaavati, a princess. b, .
prabhu1, an ancient king .
prabhu2, = brahmaan, .
pracetas1, a rishi or prajaapati . u, . b, . pracetas, pl. praacetas1 .
pracetas3, pl. .
praacetas2, pl. = pracetas, pl .
praacinvat, an ancient king .
praacinabarhis, a prajaapati . b, .
praacya, pl a people .
prashami, an apsaras. b, .
prashastaa, a river .
prashni, v. prishni.
pradara, pl a people .
pradaatri, a vishvadeva .
praadhaa, daughter of daksha and wife of kashyapa .
pradhaana, a raajarshi. b, .
praadheya, pl a family of devagandharvas อด, .
pradveshi, wife of dirghatamas .
pradyota, a yaksha .
pradyumna, son of krishna and rukmini . g, . b, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms jaanardani, . kaarshni, q.v. makaradhvaja, makaraketumat, q.v. raukmineya, . rukmininandana, . saatvatamukhya, vrishnipravira, q.v.
praghasa, a raakshasa .
praghasaa, a maatri. u, .
praagjyotisha1, name of a city . b, . c, . b, .
prahaasa1, a serpent .
prahaasa2, a warrior of skanda. u, .
prahasta, a raakshasa . raakshasa.
prahlaada1, an asura . virocana, the son of the king of the daityas p for the sake of obtaining a bride, quarrelled with sudhanvan aangirasa, and they mutually wagered their lives as to who was superior, and made p. the arbitrator between them. as p. was frightened, sudhanvan threatened him saying that if he answered falsely or did not answer, indra would split his head into pieces with his thunderbolt. p. then asked kashyapa what regions were obtainable by those who, upon being asked a question, answered it not or answered it falsely. kashyapa said that they cast, vaaruna paashas upon themselves, each of which could not be loosened in less than a full year, etc. p. then declared sudhanvan to be superior to virocana, as angiras was to himself, and the mother of sudhanvan to the mother of virocana. sudhanvan, because p. had spoken truth, granted that virocana should live years, . b, . f p the son of hiranyakashipu, could not raise the dart of skanda, but fell n in a swoon, . b, . asuraadhipa, asurendra, daiteya, daitya, daityapati, daityendra, daanava.
prahlaada2, a baahlika prince .
prahlaada3, a serpent .
prahlaada, pl a people .
prahraada, an asura, = prahlaada . b, . for synonyms v. prahlaada.
prajaagaraa, an apsaras .
. dhritaraashtra, after sanjaya had left him, requested vidura to tell him what may be good for a person that is sleepless and burning. vidura said that yudhishthira was worthy of being the sovereign over the three worlds, while the qualities of dhritaraashtra were the very reverse of those dhritaraashtra had no right to a share in the king owing to his being blind vidura blamed him for having bestowed on duryodhana, shakuni, karna, and dushaasana the management of the empire. then he explained the marks of a wise man and of a fool, quoting brihaspatis answer to indra, and alluding to the conversation between sudhanvan and asurendra in relation to the son of the latter . continuation of viduras discourse . vidura said that as long as a mans good deeds are spoken of in this world, so long he is glorified in heaven, and cited the old story about the conversation between virocana and sudhanvan, both suitors for keshinis hand. entrusting the cares of thy king to duryodhana, shakuni, the foolish dushaasana, and to karna, how canst thou hope for prosperity possessed of every virtue, the paandavas depend on thee as their father oh, confide thou in them as thy sons . vidura related the old history of the discourse between aatreya and the saadhyas, who received instruction from aatreya when he was wandering as a beggar . then he explained what are those families that are called high . vidura spoke of the seven and ten kinds of foolish men according to manu svaayam bhuva of the reasons why not all men attain the allotted period of life, etc. but dhritaraashtra could not aban his son .
prajaanaam pati, .
prajaapati1, mostly identified or identifiable with brahmaan . b, . c, . c, . d, . d, . b, . kk, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, . d, . b, . b, . i, . b, . d, . b, . b, . g, . prajaanaam pati.
prajaapati2, the father of the vasus .
prajaapati5, said of different rishis, etc. agni, . bharata, . shashabindu, . shukra, . daksha, . prajaanaam pati. havirdhaaman, . indra, . kashyapa, . kapila, . kardama, . kshupa, . prajaanaam adhipa. manu, . prithu vainya, . soma, . svishtakrit, . tvashtri, . vishvakarman, . virana, .
prajaapati, pl. . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . prajaanaam pataya.
prajaapatisutaa, dual, = kadru and vinataa, .
praajaapatya, adj. . b, b, . b, . b, .
praajaapatya, pl. . b, . b, .
praajaapatyaa lokaa . l gautama said above heaven are the great p. l happy and free from sorrow, coveted by all, belonging to them from whom all the worlds have sprung. dhritaraashtra said these regions are for the kings who are anointed after the raajasuya sacrifice, righteous protectors of their subjects, who have bathed after the horse sacrifice, .
prajnaastra, name of a celestial weapon .
prakaasha1, a rishi. b, .
prakaashakarman, prakaashakartri, q.v. = surya.
prakaalana, a serpent .
praakshringavat, a rishi. ii, . gaalavasambhava. gaalavi.
praakkoshala, pl v. kosala, pl.
praakkotaka, pl a people .
prakriti, . do. personif .
prakriti, pl. .
pralamba, an asura .
pramadvaraa, wife of ruru . menakaa dropped her child by vishvaavasu, p. near the hermitage of sthulakesha, who took it up and reared it. p. was betrothed to ruru, but a few days before the nuptials she was killed by a snake, . svastyaa treya, etc came to see her . ruru retired into a deep wood and, weeping aloud, cried to the gods to resuscitate p. a devaduta told him to resign to her half of his own life, which he did. then the king of the gandharvas and the devaduta obtained from dharma the favour that p. revived endued with a moiety of rurus life then they were married and became happy, . b, .
pramaana, name of a banyan tree .
pramaanakoti, name of a place .
pramataka, a rishi .
pramatha, a son of dhritaraashtra .
pramatha, pl a kind of raakshasas, followers of shiva .
pramaatha1, a companion of skanda. u, .
pramaatha2, v. pramaathin1.
pramaathin1, a son of dhritarashtra .
pramaathin2, a raakshasa, brother of dushana and vajravega dushanaavarajau vajravega pauvajravega paukumbhakarnaadivadhadushanaavarajam, slain by the monkey nala
pramaathin3, a raakshasa .
pramaathini, an apsaras .
pramati, a rishi, father of ruru . b, . bhaargava.
pramlocaa, an apsaras .
pramoda1, a serpent .
pramoda2, a warrior of skanda. u, .
pramohanaastra, name of a weapon .
pramuca, a rishi . next.
pramucu, a rishi . the prec.
praana2, name of fires .
praana3, one of the five vital breaths . b, . c the wind or breath called praana residing within the head, and the heat that is there, cause all kinds of exertion. that praana is the living creature, the universal soul, the eternal being, and the mind, intellect, and consciousness of all living creatures, etc. thus the living being is, in every respect, caused by praana to move about and exert...that heat, residing between apaana and praana, in the region of the navel, operates, with the aid of those two breaths, in digesting all food that is taken by a living creature. there is a duct beginning from the mouth n to the anal canal. its extremity is called the anus. from this main duct numerous subsidiary ones branch out in the bodies of all living creatures. in consequence of the rush of the several breaths those breaths mingle together. the heat is called ushman. it is this heat that causes digestion...the breath called praana, the bearer of a current of heat, descends nwards to the extremity of the anal canal and thence is pushed upwards again. coming back to its seat in the head it once more sends back the heat it bears. below the navel is the region of digested matter, and above it that for the food not yet digested. the navel is the depositary of all the forces of life, which sustain the body. urged by the ten kinds of breaths the ducts, branching out from the heart, convey the liquid juices that food yields upwards, nwards, and in transverse directions. the main duct leading from the mouth to the anus is the path by which yogins succeed in attaining to braahman by holding the soul within the brain. even thus heat is planted in the breaths called praana and apaana of all embodied creatures. that heat is always burning there like fire in any vessel, . b, . b, . g, . b, . g, .
praana, pl .
pranidhi, name of a fire .
praannadi, a tirtha .
praapti1, wife of shama .
praapti2, daughter of jaraasandha and wife of kamsa .
praruja1, a naaga .
praruja2, a raakshasa .
prasandhi, son of manu. b, .
prasankhyaana, pl a class of rishis. h, .
prasena, son of karna อด, .
prasenajit, an ancient king .
prasravanam indrasya, a tirtha .
prasthala, pl a people, a clan of the trigartas .
prastuta, a daitya .
prasuhma, pl a people . suhma, pl.
prasvaapa, name of a weapon .
prataapa, a sauvira prince, one of the standard bearers of jayadratha .
praatara, a serpent.
pratardana1, king of the kaashis, son of divodaasa . b, . b, . divo daasaatmaja, kaashipati.
pratardana2, a kuru warrior .
praticya, pl. .
praticya, adj. .
praticyaa, the wife of pulastya .
pratishravana, a nakshatra .
pratishravas, an ancient king .
pratijnaaparvan . in the evening, when arjuna having slain large numbers of samshaptakas, pro ceeded towards his tent, he said to krishna that his heart was affrighted he noticed indications of disaster abhimanyu did not come out with smiles to receive him, etc. he remembered that drona had this day formed the circular army, which none save abhimanyu could break, but he had not taught him how to come out of it, after having pierced it he had heard the leonine shouts of the dhaartaraashtras, and krishna had heard yuyutsu censuring them for having slain a child instead of arjuna, and then yuyutsu had thrown away his weapons afflicted with rage and grief. krishna con soled arjuna, referring to the kshatriya duties and heaven. none save krishna and yudhishthira could address arjuna. yudhishthira, addressing him, told him the particulars of abhimanyus heroism and fall. arjuna vowed to slay jayadratha before the setting of the morrows sun even as to as men, birds, snakes, p wanderers of the night, b. ri . ri etc he said that they would not succeed in protecting him, even if he entered rasaatala, or ascended the firmament, or repaired to the city of the gods or the city of diti if the sun set before he had slain him, he would himself ascend the pyre. arjuna bent the gaandiva, krishna blew the paancajanya, arjuna the devadatta . having been informed by spies, jayadratha was overwhelmed with sorrow and fear, thinking that not even drona, etc not even g as u raa can protect him against arjuna he wished to return home. duryodhana comforted him, saying that he, karna, etc would protect him. jayadratha, accompanied by duryodhana, repaired that very night to drona and questioned him about the difference between himself and arjuna. drona said they had got the same instruction, but arjuna was superior to jayadratha in consequence of yoga and the hard life led by arjuna drona would, however, protect him, forming an impenetrable array and, moreover, death ought not to be an object of terror to him . krishna remonstrated with arjuna for his rash vow the kurus had expected an attack by arjuna now they will protect jayadratha karna, etc. would be in jayadrathas van dronas army would be half a shakata and half a lotus with a needle mouthed array in the middle . arjuna assured krishna of his competence to accomplish his vow, notwithstanding drona, saa r a m with indra, . p g garuda, etc by the means of gaandiva and the weapons he had obtained from yama, etc and the braahma weapon . the gods with indra became very anxious. sinister omens appeared in nature. krishna went to arjunas abode and comforted subhadraa . subhadraa lamented over abhimanyu, and said fie on bhimasena, etc because they had not protected him. draupadi and uttaraa came to her, lamenting krishna said that abhimanyu had obtained the most laudable and enviable goal. then he returned to arjuna . arjuna performed his usual nightly sacrifice to shiva. krishna with daaruka repaired to his own tent. none in the paandava camp slept that night, thinking of arjuna. in the middle of the night krishna said to daaruka that he had resolved to fight to morrow he should equip his chariot, placing on it kaumodaki, etc making room for garuda, and yoking thereto balaahaka, etc. when hearing pancajanya emitting the shrill rishabha note, he should come to krishna . arjuna in a dream saw krishna, who told him not to grieve, and mentioned the paashupata weapon if he remembered it now, he would be able to slay jayadratha to morrow otherwise he should pray to shiva. at the braahma hour, arjuna saw himself sojourning through the sky manimat, frequented by si. and caa etc. with krishna, to where shiva was seated with paarvati krishna and arjuna hymned mahaadeva . arjuna saw that the offerings he had made every night to krishna had come to shiva, and he mentally worshipped both krishna and shiva. shiva then told krishna and arjuna where to fetch his bow and arrow from a lake of amrita. in the lake they saw two terrible snakes when they had uttered the brahma shatarudriya, the snakes assumed the forms of a bow and arrow. from shivas body there came out a brahmacaarin of blue throat and red locks, and having showed arjuna the use of the bow and arrow, and the mantras, he sped these weapons to that same lake. having thus once more obtained the paashupata weapon, arjuna with krishna came back to their own camp . the four teenth day. yudhishthira underwent his morning rites krishna visited yudhishthira . then also viraata, etc came . yudhishthira asked krishna to rescue the paandavas, quoting naarada. krishna assured yudhishthira of arjunas success . arjuna came and acquainted yudhishthira of his dream. then he and krishna and yuyudhaana set out to arjunas pavilion. krishna equipped arjunas chariot, which arjuna circumambulated, bow and arrows in hand. arjuna, yuyu dhaana, and krishna mounted the chariot. many auspicious omens appeared. arjuna charged yuyudhaana to protect yudhishthira in his absence . yuyudhaana proceeded to yudhishthira .
praatikaamin, . suta, sutaja, sutaputra.
pratimaasya or pratimatsya, pl a people . potimatsaka.
pratipa, an ancient king . kurunandana.
pratirupa, an asura. b, .
pratiskandha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
pratishthaa, a maatri. u, .
pratishthaana, a city .
pratismriti, name of a science .
pratita, a vishvadeva .
prativindhya1, son of yudhishthira and draupadi . yaudhishthira, yaudhishthiri.
prativindhya2, one or more kings .
prativindhya, pl. .
pratyagraha, son of vasu uparicara .
pratyanga, an ancient king .
pratyusha, name of one of the vasus .
praushthapada, name of a month .
praushthapadaa, v. proshthapadaa.
pravaha, name of a certain wind . h . the wind which urges masses of clouds born of smoke and heat, is the first of the winds and named p .
pravaaha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
pravaalaka, a yaksha .
pravaraa, a river .
praavaara, a region on krauncadvipa . next.
praavaarakarna, name of an old owl .
pravasu, son of ilina .
praveni, a river .
pravepana, a serpent .
pravira, son of puru .
pravira, pl a people .
praavrisheya, pl a people .
prayaaga, a tirtha at the confluence of the gangaa and the yamunaa . at p whose praise has been sung by rishis, the gods dwell with brahmaan at their head, further the quarters with their presiding deities, the lokapaalas, the saadhyas, the pitris, the great rishis sanatkumaara, etc the stainless brahmarshis, angiras, etc the naagas, the suparnas, the siddhas, the cakracaras, the rivers, the seas, the gandharvas, the apsarases, and hari with prajaapati. there are three fire caverns between which the gangaa, that foremost of tirthas, rolls rapidly. there the world purifying daughter of the sun yamunaa unites with the gangaa. the country between the gangaa and the yamunaa is regarded as the mons veneris of the earth, and the rishis regard p. as its genitals . p. with pratishthaana, kambala, and ashvatara and the tirtha bhogavati constitute the altar of prajaapati. there the vedas and the sacrifices in their embodied forms and the rishis ae prajaapati there the gods and rulers of territories perform their sacrifices therefore p. is the most sacred in the three worlds and the foremost of all tirthas. by going thither, by praising it, etc one is cleansed from sin, etc and he who bathes there obtains the merit of a raajasuya and an ashvamedha. let not the words of the vedas nor the words of men dissuade thy mind from the desire of dying at p. there are, tirthas at p. by only bathing there one acquires the merits of the four kinds of knowledge and of the truthful, . p, .
prayaaga, pl a people .
prayuta, a devagandharva .
preta, pl . pitri, pl.
priyaa, wife of the fire adbhuta .
priyabhritya, an ancient king .
priyadarshana, a warrior of skanda. u, .
priyaka, a warrior of skanda. u, .
priyamaalyaanulepana, a warrior of skanda. u, .
priyankara, an ancient king .
proshaka, pl a people .
proshtha, pl a people .
proshthapadaa, dual and pl name of a ble nakshatra . bhaadrapadaa.
prishni, pl a class of rishis .
prishadashva, an ancient king .
prishaddhra, an ancient king . next.
prishadhra, one or more ancient kings . the prec.
prishadhru, a paandava warrior .
prishata, king of the paancaalas, father of drupadadrupadafriend of bharadvaajafather of drupadacaitrarathap.friend of bharadvaaja and father of drupadasucceeded by drupada
prishtaja, a son or form of skanda .
prithaashva, an ancient king .
prithaatmaja, pl. = paartha, pl .
prithivi, . prithvi.
prithivitirtha, a tirtha .
prithu1, name of a vasu . dhara.
prithu2, a vrishni .
prithu3, a king of ayodhyaa .
prithu4, = shiva, . do. = vishnu .
prithu vainya, a mythical king . king prithu vainya in his raajasuya was installed by m. ri. as emperor . during his time the earth yielded crops in sufficiency, etc. the kusha blades were all of gold, etc. when king p. went to the sea, the waves became solid the very mountains used to open before him that he might pass through them. once the trees, the mountains, the gods, the asuras, the men, the uragas, the seven rishis, the yakshas, the apsarases, and the pitris came to p. and calling him their emperor, etc asked boons from him. taking his aajagava bow, p. caused them to milk the earth by means of a calf, a milker, and vessels for various kinds of milk the shaala tree, the fig tree, a vessel of udumbara wood, torn buds . the eastern hill, meru, a stone vessel, gems and herbs . a god, things capable of bestowing strength . the asuras virocana, dvimurdhan, an unbaked pot, wine . men manu svaayambhuva, prithu, cultivation and crops . the serpents takshaka, dhritaraashtra, a gourd, poison . the seven rishis soma, brihaspati, chandas, the vedas . the yakshas vrishadhvaja, vaishravana, an unbaked pot, the power of disappearing at will . . the gandharvas and the apsarases citraratha, vishvaruci, a lotus, perfumes . the pitris yama vaivasvata, antaka, silvern vessels, svadhaa . to this day the creatures exist in the same way. p. caused golden images to be made of every article on earth and bestowed them all on the brahmans at his great horse sacrifice, also, elephants of gold also the whole world, . b, . f . when p. had sprung from the right hand of vena, the m. ri r and the gods told him to observe righteousness and punish the wicked, etc. shukra became his priest, the vaalakhilyas his counsellors, the saarasvatas his companions, the m. ri. garga became his astrologer suta and maagadha became his panegyrists, he gave to suta the land lying on the sea coast, to maagadha magadha. p. made the earth even, removing the rocks lying around with the horn of his bow by this means the hills and the mountains became enlarged. then vishnu, etc. crowned p. and gave him rich gifts steeds, chariots, etc came into existence as soon as p. thought of them. at this time there was neither decrepitude nor famine, etc nobody had any fear from reptiles and thieves, etc. when he proceeded to the sea, the waters used to be solidified, the mountains granted him passage, etc. he drew from the earth as a milker from a cow seventeen kinds of crops for the y raa and n etc. he caused all creatures to regard righteousness as the foremost of all things he was called raajan and kshatriya, etymology of the name prithivi. vishnu confirmed his power and entered his body in consequence of his penances for this reason the entire universe bows to the king as to a god. at this time a gold lotus was born from vishnus brow, from that lotus was born the goddess shri, who became the spouse of dharma their son was artha all the three were established in sovereignty. the king is really a portion of vishnu on earth. he who once beheld his amiable face became obedient to him, . f it was prithu vainya who first created the bow he also milked the earth for very many grain and protected the earth virtuously as before, . b, . prajaapati, vainya.
prithushravas1, one or more ancient kings .
prithushravas2, a brahman .
prithushravas3, a warrior of skanda. u, .
prithushravas4, a serpent .
prithudaka, a tirtha on the sarasvati . they say that kurukshetra is holy, that sarasvati is holier than kurukshetra, that the tirthas are holier than sarasvati, and p. holier than the tirthas. it has been sung by sanat kumaara and vyaasa that he who, reciting prayer, gives up his body in p. shall not die . even the sinful attain to heaven by bathing in p . l, . b, .
prithulaashva, an ancient king .
prithulaaksha, an ancient king .
prithuvaktraa, a maatri. u, .
prithuvega, an ancient king .
pucchaandaka, a serpent .
pujani, name of a bird. b, .
pukkasha or pukkasa, name of a caste, .
pulaha, a rishi, one of the mind born sons of brahmaan . u, . b, . c, . b, .
pulastya, a rishi, one of the mind born sons of brahmaan, . u, . b, . c, . b, . brahmarshi, brahmayoni, viprarshi.
pulina, a naaga .
pulinda, pl a barbarous people . b, . b, . pulindaka, pl.
pulinda, sg. .
pulindaka, pl a people . pulinda, pl.
pulkasa, v. pukkasha.
pulomaa, the wife of bhrigu. p the wife of bhrigu, had first been betrothed to the raakshasa puloman, who one day when bhrigu was absent came to carry her away, and asked the sacrificial fire whether she was rightly his or bhrigus wife. the fire answered that she was bhrigus, by whom she had been taken with holy rites and invocations . when puloman began to carry her away cyavana dropped from her womb, and puloman instantly was converted to ashes. of her tears brahmaan formed the river vadhusaraa, bhrigu cursed agni, .
pulomaa, a female asura .
puloman, a raakshasa, or asura . b, . daanava, daanavanandana, rakshas.
punaraavartanandaa, name of a tirtha. u by bathing in p as also in mahaanandaa, one attains to nandana. by bathing in the tirtha urvashi on the river lohitya on the day of full moon of the month of kaarttika one obtains the merits of a pundarika sacrifice, .
punarvasu1, name of a nakshatra .
pundarika1, an ancient king .
pundarika2, a tirtha .
pundarika3, a serpent .
pundarikaa, an apsaras .
pundariyaka, a vishvadeva .
pundra, v. pundra1.
pundra1, an ancient king .
pundra, pl a people . e, . paundra, pl paundrika, pl pundraka, pl.
pundraka, pl. = pundra, pl .
punjikasthalaa, an apsaras .
punya1, name of a lake . punyaakhya2.
punyaa, a river .
punyajana, pl a designation of certain supernatural beings, as yakshas or raakshasas, .
punyaakhya1, name of one or more hermitages . do name of a lake .
punyakrit, a vishvadeva .
punyanaaman, a warrior of skanda. u, .
punyodakaa, a river .
puramaalini, a river .
puraana, sg. and pl .
purana, a rishi .
puranjaya, a kuru warrior .
puraavati, a river .
purikaa, name of a city .
purna1, a serpent .
purna2, a devagandharva .
purnabhadra, a serpent .
purnaashaa, v. parnaashaa.
purnamukha, a serpent .
purnaangada, a serpent .
purnaayus, a devagandharva .
purocana, name of a man, a confidant and helper of duryo dhana .
puroravas, v. pururavas.
puru1, v. puru1.
puru2, a king at the time of yudhishthira .
puru3, the charioteer of arjuna .
puru4, a mountain .
puru1, an ancient king, son of yayaati. . f from p. the pauravas descended, . b . b, .
puru2, v. puru3.
puru3, a prince .
purujit1, an ancient king .
purujit2, a kunti prince . kuntibhoja, kuntivardhana1.
purukutsa, an ancient king, son of maandhaatri .
purumidha, a prince .
purumitra, a son of dhritaraashtra . kurupravira.
pururavas, an ancient king, son of ilaa, and husband of urvashi . p. was born of ilaa, who was both his father and mother. p. held sway over thirteen dvipas, and though a human being he was always surrounded with beings who were not human. he robbed the brahmans of their wealth. sanat kumaara then came from brahmaloka and gave him good advice, which he rejected. then p who intoxicated with power had lost his reason, was destroyed by the curse of the maharshis. accompanied by urvashi, he, for sacrificial purposes, brought the fires from the gandharvaloka duly arranged in three places, . p. had from urvashi six sons aayus, dhimat, amaavasu, dridhaayus, vanaayus, and shataayus. aayus married svarbhaanavi, and had from her the sons nahusha, vriddhasharman, raaji, gaya, and anenas . e, . b, . aila.
a section of sambhavaparvan . purupaushti. pravira, ishvara, raudraashva . manasyu . riceyu others . shakta others . matinaara. tamsu, mahat, atiratha, druhyu. ilinarathantari. dushyantashakuntalaa, shura, bhima, pravasu, vasu. bharata. bharata obtained from bharadvaaja a son of the name bhumanyu, who became his heir apparent. bharata. bhumanyu . diviratha, suhotra, suhotri, suhavis, suyajus, ricika. ajamidha others . riksha, dushyanta, parameshthin, jahnu others . samvarana. paancaalaah. kushikaa. samvarana . samvaranatapati sauri. kuru . avikshit others . parikshit others . janamejaya others . dhritaraashtra, paandu, baahlika others kundika, hastin others . among the grandsons of dhritaraashtra three became famous pratipa, dharmanetra, and sunetra. pratipa had three sons devaapi, shaantanu, and baahlika. devaapi ated an ascetic life shaantanu and baahlika became kings. there were many other kings like to the devarshis, in the race of bharata and manu, who aned the aila dynasty . janamejaya wished to hear the same more in full, commencing from manu. daksha. aditi. vivasvat. manu. ilaa. pururavas. ayus. nahusha. ushanas. vrishaparvan. yayaati. devayaani. sharmishthaa yadu, turvasu, druhyu, anu, puru . yaadavaa. janamejaya . praacinvat . samyaati . ahamyaati . saarvabhauma . jayatsena . avaacina . ariha . mahaabhauma . ayutanaayin . akrodhana . devaatithi . ariha . riksha . matinaara . tamsu . ilina . ilina . dushyanta other sons. bharata . bhumanyu . suhotra . hastin . vikunthana . ajamidha samvarana other sons. kuru . viduratha . anashvan . parikshit . bhimasena . praticravas. pratipa . devaapi, shaantanu, baahlika. devavrata or bhishma, vicitravirya, citraangada. vicitravirya died without leaving a child. then satyavati began to think how the dynasty of dushyanta might be perpetuated, and she recollected the rishi dvaipaayana and prevailed upon him to beget three children for vicitravirya dhritaraashtra, paandu, vidura. in consequence of a boon granted by dvaipaayana, dhritaraashtra had sons by gaandhaari, of whom the most celebrated were duryodhana, dushaasana, vikarna, and citrasena. paandu had two wives kunti or prithaa, and maadri. one when hunting, he with his arrow pierced a rishi cohabiting with a deer. the rishi cursed him, saying that he should also die when in such a state. paandu then prevailed upon kunti to raise offspring for him, and by dharma she had yudhishthira, by maaruta bhimasena, and by shakra arjuna. he then caused her to impart on maadri the vidyaa, and maadri by the ashvins had nakula and sahadeva. one day when paandu, filled with desire, touched maadri, he immediately died, and maadri ascended the funeral pyre with him, after having recom mended her twins to kunti. then the paandavas with kunti were taken by the ascetics to haastinapura and introduced to bhishma and vidura, whereafter the ascetics disappeared from sight, while flames poured n upon the earth and the drums of the gods were heard. they then performed the obsequial rites for their father. as they were being brought up there duryodhana became exceedingly jealous of them. brief mention of duryodhanas efforts against the paandavas how they are sent by dhritaraashtra to vaaranaavata to be burnt in a lac house, but are rescued by vidura killing of hidimba they go to ekacakraa kill the raakshasa baka go to paancaala nagara, obtain draupadi, and return home. the eleven sons of the paandavas prativindhya sutasoma shrutakirti shataanika shrutakarman yaudheya sarvaga abhimanyu
purvaa, sc. dish .
purvaabhiraamaa, a river .
purvacitti, an apsaras .
purvapaalin, a king .
purvapurvaanugandikaa, name of a place. j, .
pushan, a god, one of the aadityas . b, . u, . b, . d, .
pushanaa, a maatri. u, .
pushkara1, sg. and pl name of a group of tirthas . b, . p. is the tirtha of the god of the gods, where the aadityas, the vasus, the rudras, the saadhyas, the marudganas, the gandharvas, and the apsarases are ever present, and where the gods, the daityas, and the brahmarshis have obtained great merit by ascetic devotions. the bathing there is equal to the bathing in all tirthas together and to horse sacrifices, and frees even shudras from rebirth especially the visiting of p. on the day of the full moon in the month of kaarttika is equal in merit to the performing of agnihotras during a hundred years, and leads to the worlds of brahmaan dwelling twelve years purely at p. gives the merit of all sacrifices and leads to the abode of brahmaan. there are three white hillocks and three springs, known from the remotest times we not know why by the name of p. it is difficult to go to p etc . i, . b, . c by bathing in p. and prabhaasa and naimisha, and the ocean and devikaa and indramaarga, and svarnabindu, one attains to heaven, . m, . c, .
pushkara3, son of varuna .
pushkara3, brother of nala p. won from nala his king, etc.nala vanquished p. at dice and recovered his king, etc.karnap.all. to nalopaa khyaanaparvan
pushkara4, name of a dvipa .
pushkara5, name of a mountain in the dvipa pushkara .
pushkaradhaarini, wife of the brahman satya .
pushkaramaalini, the sabhaa of indra . do the sabhaa of varuna .
pushkaraaranya, name of a forest in the tirtha pushkara . pushkara1.
pushkarini, wife of bhumanyu .
pushpa, a serpent . the two next.
pushpadamshtra, a serpent . the next.
pushpadanta1, a serpent. d, .
pushpadanta2, a companion of skanda. u, .
pushpaka, the vimaana of kubera. b p. was constructed by vishvakarman, . x, .
pushpaambhas, a tirtha .
pushpaanana, a yaksha .
pushpavat1, a mountain on kushadvipa .
pushpavat2, an asura. b, .
pushpavati, a tirtha .
pushpaveni, a river .
pushpodakaa, a river .
pushpotkataa, name of a female raakshasa.
pushti, a goddess .
pushtimati, a fire .
put, name of a hell . cf .
putanaa, a female demon .
putanaa, a maatri. u, .
. janamejaya said tell me what that wonderful feat was which m. ri. vyaasa accomplished after his promise to dhritaraashtra when he had taken up his abode in the forest with gaandhaari and kunti, and after vidura had left his body and entered into yudhishthira, and when all the paandavas were in the ascetic retreat for how many days did yudhishthira stay with his men in the woods on what food did the paandavas support themselves with their men and wives vaishampaayana said the paandavas passed about a month in that forest, supporting themselves on diverse kinds of food and drink. then vyaasa came there and naarada, etc. they sat n on sacred seats and on seats of peacock feathers gaandhaari, etc. also sat n they spoke of ri and as. then vyaasa said that he knew that burning grief in the heart of dhritaraashtra, etc. let g and m. ri. to day behold the energy of my penances therefore tell me what wish of thine shall grant to day. dhritaraashtra wished to see his dead children and kinsmen, mentioning duryodhana and the slaughter of bhishma and drona. hearing this the grief of gaandhaari, etc. became fresh gaandhaari said that for sixteen years dhritaraashtra never had slept for grief and also krishnaa, etc. grieved exceedingly. vyaasa then asked kunti to tell what she wished . kunti told the story of karnas birth vyaasa promised to show her karna, and said that she had no fault in what had happened about the birth of karna the gods beget after five methods vyaasa promised to show everyone the persons whom they wished to see and who were in the other world they were all portions of . both g aps psh gh raa punyajanaa, si . ri and daa. met with death on the battlefield of kurukshetra he explained who among the dead, etc was what dhritaraashtra was the gandharva king dhritaraashtra, etc. . they all, dhritaraashtra with his ministers and the paandavas and ri. and g proceeded towards the bhaagirathi and waited for the advent of night at sunset they bathed and finished their evening rites . when night came, vyaasa plunged into the bhaagirathi for a bath, and summoned all the deceased warriors, who all rose up from the water with a loud uproar, everyone presenting the same aspect that he did when clad for battle there were bhishma, etc. all of them were now robed in celestial vestments and had brilliant earrings they were free from all animosity, etc. g. sang their praises, etc. each of them was waited upon by bands of aps. vyaasa gave dhritaraashtra celestial vision endued with celestial knowledge, gaandhaari saw all the slain dhritaraashtra became full of joy . divested of wrath and malice, the spirits of the dead mingled with the living in happy converse . having sported with one another for that night they, taking leave from each other, returned to the places they had come from, vyaasa dismissing them within the twinkling of an eye of raa. and psh. some proceeded to the uttarakurus, others to the gods. with vyaasas permission, many wis plunged into the waters of the bhaagirathi in order to accompany their deceased lords, and proceeded to those regions where their husbands had found their abodes. vyaasa granted to all the men there assembled the fruition of their wishes. people of diverse realms, hearing of this meeting between the dead and living, became highly delighted . sauti said janamejaya filled with joy asked vaishampaayana, how it is possible for persons whose bodies have been destroyed to reappear in those very forms. vaishampaayana said acts are never destroyed bodies are born of acts so also are features, etc quoting a shruti in the horse sacrifice . dhritaraashtra had never beheld his own sons, but got spiritual vision from vyaasa, he had learnt all the royal duties, as also the vedas and upanishads vidura attained to high success through penances. janamejaya said if vyaasa shows me my father as he was when he died may then believe all that thou hast told me. sauti said then vyaasa brought parikshit, and shamika and his son shringin all the counsellors and ministers of the king beheld them. janamejaya, performing the final bath in his sacrifice, highly rejoiced he poured the sacred water over his father, as also over himself then he said to aastika that this his sacrifice was fraught with many wonderful incidents aastika praised vyaasa and the snake sacrifice, from which takshaka had with difficulty escaped, the worship of ri etc. janamejaya honoured aastika, and then asked ri. vaishampaayana about dhritaraashtras further residence in the woods . janamejaya said having seen his sons, etc what did dhritaraashtra, and king yudhishthira also, vaishampaa yana said beholding that wonderful sight, the reappearance of his children, r. ri. dhritaraashtra became relieved of his grief and returned to his retreat the people and ri dismissed by dhritaraashtra, returned home. vyaasa came and asked dhritaraashtra to dismiss the paandavas, who now had passed more than a month in the woods. dhritaraashtra addressed yudhishthira affectionately, and dismissed him and his brothers. yudhishthira offered to wait upon his uncle and his two mothers gaandhaari dissuaded him from that step. yudhishthira said that his mind was wholly set upon penances, as the whole earth were empty now, etc. sahadeva, saying that he dared not leave his mother, urged yudhishthira to return to the capital he would himself remain, engaged in penances and in serving the old king and his mothers. kunti affectionately dissuaded her sons from remaining with her and thereby obstructing her penances. they then took leave of their mother and dhritaraashtra, who blessed and comforted yudhishthira, etc and embraced them one after another. then gaandhaari blessed them, and kunti kissed them on their heads, etc. gaandhaari and kunti embraced draupadi, etc and instructed them. yudhishthira with his wives and troops and kinsmen set out for haastinapura .
rabhenaka, a serpent .
rashmivat, a vishvadeva .
raadhaa, wife of adhiratha, foster mother of karna. b, .
raagaa, name of a daughter of angiras .
raaghava, pl. .
raghu, an ancient king .
rahasyaa, a river .
raahu, an asura, the demon who causes eclipses . b, . b, . b, . b, . daitya, daanava, graha, svarbhaanu.
raibhya, a brahman, father of arvaavasu and paraavasu . b at the hermitage of r. the kavi yavakrita bhaaradvaaja perished, . c, . b, .
raibhyaputra paraavasu, .
raivata1, a mountain near dvaarakaa . raivataka.
raivata2, a rishi. .
raivata3, a graha, .
raivata4, an ancient king .
raivata5, a rudra .
raivata6, adj. .
raivataka1, a mountain .
raivataka2, a mountain in shaakadvipa. b, .
raja, a warrior of skanda. u, .
. after the completion of the water rites by the paandavas, etc many brahmarshis, etc came to yudhishthira. naarada congratulated yudhishthira upon his success. yudhishthira lamented the loss of his kinsmen yudhishthira at the match of dice had wondered seeing that karnas feet resembled the feet of kunti he inquired of naarada, why the earth had swallowed up the wheels of karnas chariot . naarada recited to yudhishthira the story of karinas pupilage with drona and raama and the curse called n upon him by a brahman whose cow karna had inadvertently slain then the story of karnas extraordinary powers of endurance, in consequence of which his real caste became known to raama, who there upon cursed him for his deceit the worm alarka was an asura named damsha, who in the krita age had ravished the spouse of bhrigu and been cursed by him, until he should be liberated by parashu raama. karna, arriving before duryo dhana, told him have mastered every weapon . naarada said to a self choice at raajapura, the capital of the kaalinga king citraangada duryodhana, shishupaala, etc repaired the maiden passed by duryodhana, who then took her up on his chariot and abducted her by force. karna, riding on his chariot, proceeded in duryodhanas rear. the kings pursued karna and duryodhana but karna made them all turn away, and duryodhana reached haastinapura with the maiden . naarada said the maagadha king jaraasandha challenged karna to a single combat at last they fought with bare arms, and karna was about to sever the two portions of jaraasandhas body that had been united together by jaraa then jaraasandha gave up all desire of hostility and gave unto karna the town maalini . from that time he ruled over campaa and the angas agreeably to the wishes of duryodhana. allusions to, etc. . . ri. naarada became silent yudhishthira grieved kunti comforted yudhishthira by telling him that neither she nor surya could dissuade karna from fighting the paandavas . yudhishthiras lament before arjuna he wished to renounce the sovereignty . arjuna addressed yudhishthira, justifying war and approving of the acquisition of wealth, quoting nahusha, and citing the conduct of the gods and daa which is sanctioned by the vedas this earth formerly belonged to king dilipa, etc. she now belongs to thee a great sacrifice awaits thee if thou t not perform this sacrifice, the sins of this king shall all be thine those subjects whose king performs a horse sacrifice...all become pure, as shown by the example of mahaadeva this is the great path called daasharatha . unmoved by arjunas words, yudhishthira desired to lead the life of a religious recluse . bhimas address to yudhishthira commending sovereignty . arjuna recited the story of the discourse between shakra and certain youths desirous of leading a forest life . nakula addressed yudhishthira, blaming renunci ation and commending the life of a householder . sahadeva recommended to yudhishthira a life of action with the soul free from attachments . draupadi reminded yudhishthira of his former counsels . arjuna praised him who wields the rod of chastisement indra, by the slaughter of vritra, became the great indra those among the gods that are given to slaughtering others are aed much more by men rudra, etc. are all slaughterers all people bend to these gods, but not to brahmaan or dhaatri or pushan at any time, except a few men of noble disposition . bhimas second address to yudhishthira, urging him to subdue his grief . yudhishthira exposed the folly of earthly enjoyments quoting janaka my treasures are immense yet possess nothing if again the whole of mithilaa were burnt, nothing of mine will be burnt . arjuna recited the story of the discourse between the videha king janaka and his queen, in which the latter explained the claims of a life of poverty and renunciation . yudhi shthiras reply to arjuna on the vanity of wealth . devasthaana pointed out to yudhishthira that the period had not come when he could retire into the woods, and recommended the assumption of sovereignty with his soul freed from attachment, quoting a discourse which brihaspati delivered to indra the ri etc at the religion of exertion, and attain to heaven through their acts . arjuna justified before yudhi shthira the slaughter of foes in battle indra, himself, though a brahman, became a kshatriya in his acts, and battled with his sinful kinsfolk times . vyaasa dissuaded yudhishthira from a life of retirement and commended a life of esticity, quoting a verse of brihaspati, and reciting the story of r. ri. sudyumna the brothers shankha and likhita dwelled in two separate dwellings on the banks of baahudaa once, when shankha had gone out, likhita came to his asylum and ate many ripe fruits. shankha told him to confess to the king and ask him to inflict on him the punishment of a thief. king sudyumna would par him but likhita would not sudyumna then caused his hands to be cut off likhita, having asked par of shankha, was told by him to gratify ri and p. at baahudaa, upon which two hands grew out. shankha said that he was not his chastiser, but the king has been himself purified, as also thyself, along with p. that king became eminent by this act and obtained the highest success . vyaasa exhorted yudhishthira to grant the wishes of his brothers, perform sacrifices, and imitate the great monarchs of old, especially hayagriva . hearing the words of vyaasa and seeing arjuna angry, yudhishthira declared to vyaasa that earthly rule could give him no delight. vyaasa answered, pointing out the virtues of time, quoting the old story recited by king senajit in grief. engaging in battle has been said to be the sacrifice for a king a due observance of the science of chastisement is his yoga and the gift of wealth in sacrifices in the shape of dakshinaa is his renunciation all this should be regarded as acts that sanctify him . yudhishthiras reply to arjuna recommending a life of yoga and austerities this is the practice of r regarded by . as brahmans this is the opinion of the vaikhaanasas the ajaa, etc. have all gone to heaven by means of vedic study by performing the acts indicated in the vedas, battle, sacrifices, study of the vedas, restrainment of passion, one goes to heaven by the southern path of the sun the northern path is travelled by those devoted to yoga, and is much applauded by those conversant with the puraanas one acquires heaven through contentment, citing the discourse of yayaati of old . yudhishthira censured himself for his cupidity and for the slaughter he caused of his kinsmen bhishma had, by the energy of his weapons, burnt ugraayudha, etc. vyaasa comforted yudhishthira by explaining the action of destiny, and exhorted him to work . vyaasa recited the old story, that is known by the name of ashmans discourse the videha king janaka, filled with sorrow, questioned the wise brahman ashman as to how a man should behave upon occasions of the accession and the destruction of both kinsmen and wealth. ashman said that destiny and time are inevitable no person can see either heaven or hell the scriptures, however, are the eyes of the virtuous frame thy conduct according to the scriptures. janaka became freed from grief enjoy the earth, o son of kunti . arjuna asked krishna to dispel yudhishthiras grief. krishna asked yudhi shthira not to grieve for men who died heroically in battle in the observance of kshatriya duties, quoting the shodasharaajopaa khyaana, i.e. the old discourse of naarada before srinjaya when the latter was deeply afflicted with grief on account of the death of his son. srinjaya was freed from grief, and naarada gave back to him his son suvarnashthivin, whom parvata had given him, and who had been bereft of life that child should live, years . requested by yudhishthira, krishna told naarada parvatopaakhyaana . thereafter naarada told suvarnasthivi sambhavopaakhyaana . vyaasa exhorted yudhishthira to shake off his grief and assume the reins of sovereignty. yudhishthira feared that the guilt of slaughter had stained him vyaasa repeated his observations on destiny as yudhishthira still was remorseful, vyaasa repeated his observations on time, and pointed to expiatory rites, illustrating the case by the war of, years, by which the gods, having slain dai gained possession of heaven, and slew, brahmans called shaalaavrikaa who had joined the daa. thou hast only followed the path formerly trodden by the very gods men like you never go to hell. he recommended a horse sacrifice as an expiation, mentioning that indra, assisted by the maruts, gradually performed sacrifices and became shatakratu, and is aed in the heavens by aps ri and . . vyaasa discoursed on expiation and indicated the acts for which there should be expiation, citing the sage uddaalaka, who caused his son shvetaketu to be begotten by disciple, etc and declared that by penances, religious rites, and gifts one may wash off sins if one s not commit them anew, and indicated diverse kinds of expiation for diverse kinds of sins . asked by yudhishthira, vyaasa declared what food is clean and what is unclean . yudhishthira desired to hear of the duties of kings and of the four different orders. vyaasa, casting his eyes on naarada, directed yudhishthira to apply to bhishma for discourses on kingly duties, as bhishma, having gratified . ri. with brih, at their head, had acquired a knowledge of the duties of kings, and of that science, with its interpretations, that ushanas and brihaspati know and a knowledge of all the vedas with their branches, from vasishtha and cyavana of bhrigus race in olden days he studied under sanatkumaara he learned the duties of the yatis from maarkandeya and obtained all weapons from raama and indra although childless, yet he has many regions of bliss before himself b. ri. were always his courtiers. yudhishthira was ashamed to approach bhishma. krishna exhorted yudhishthira to rise up, shaking off his grief . thus addressed by krishna, etc yudhi shthira gave up his grief and anxiety, and with his brothers and the other kings, headed by dhritaraashtra, set out for haastinapura. the procession described . the citizens welcomed yudhishthira and draupadi, etc. . yudhi shthira entered the palace with dhaumya and dhritaraashtra, and was blessed by the brahmans, but cursed by caarvaaka, a raa. who had disguised himself as a brahman, and a friend of duryodhana the brahmans killed caarvaaka by uttering the mere sound hum . krishna related in the krita age raa. caarvaaka performed penances in badari at last he solicited from brahmaan the boon of immunity from fear at the hands of every being in the universe, which brahmaan granted him, only with the limitation that he should be careful not to offend brahmans. then he began to cause trouble to the gods brahmaan predicted caarvaakas friendship with duryodhana, and that he would insult the brahmans . the ceremony of yudhishthiras installation on the throne described he made gifts to the brahmans, who all blessed him and his brothers . yudhishthira answered and enjoined respect for his aged uncle, disposed of the high appointments of state, and caused the obsequial rites to be performed in honour of the slaughtered heroes, and performed acts of kindness to the ladies, wied in the battle, the destitute, the blind, and helpless . then he aed krishna, and assigned to his brothers proper residences from among the palaces of the kuru princes slain in battle . they passed a happy night in their respective abodes, and in the morning presented themselves before king yudhishthira . yudhishthiras gifts to diverse persons . then he addressed krishna, whom he found rapt in meditation he uttered a hymn to krishna, who awoke and praised bhishma, asking yudhishthira to resort to bhishma for instruction. yudhishthira requested krishna to grant bhishma the sight of his divine person. krishna caused saatyaki to let daaruka yoke his chariot with sugriva and shaibya, etc. . descrip tion of the bed of arrows on which bhishma lay, surrounded by ri. vyaasa, etc. . bhishma hymned krishna . krishna moved by bhishmas aations, bestowed upon him heavenly knowledge compassing the past, the present, and the future, and went away. those holy brahmans aed bhishma and krishna. seeing the devotion of bhishma, krishna suddenly rose from his seat and ascended his chariot with saatyaki yudhishthira and arjuna mounted another bhimasena and the twins a third kripa, yuyutsu, and sanjaya on their respective chariots . then krishna, etc proceeded to kurukshetra . krishna pointed out to yudhishthira the five lakes of raama bhaargava. requested by yudhishthira, krishna related raamopaakhyaana . then he proceeded quietly in his chariot . yudhishthiras eulogy of raama . beholding from a distance the spot on which bhishma lay, yudhishthira, etc descended from their chariots and approached and saluted the ri. . seeing bhishma on the point of death, krishna addressed him kindly, and eulogized him . bhishma saluted krishna, and beheld his eternal form. krishna said that it was owing to bhishmas devotion that he had displayed his celestial form to him those regions, o king are ready for thee whence there is no return fifty six days still remain for thee to live when surya turns to his northerly course, you shall go there . and riding on their chariots, are waiting for thee invisibly. krishna asked bhishma to instruct yudhishthira, etc. when thou wilt leave this world for that, all knowledge will expire with thee . bhishma alleged physical weakness and mental darkness as reasons for his inability to obey krishna, and he also hesitated to speak in krishnas presence. krishna removed bhishmas pain and granted him power to recollect everything and behold the universe like a fish in a limpid stream. m. ri. with vyaasa aed krishna with words, accompanied by ric, yojus, and saaman verses celestial flowers fell, and aps. sang, etc. at sunset the m. ri rising up, saluted krishna, bhishma, and yudhishthira. upon this, krishna, returned to haastinapura, after having saluted bhishma, saying that they would return next day . krishna passed the night happily, performed his morning rites, and was welcomed with music and song at early dawn asked by krishna, saatyaki saw yudhishthira and apprised him of krishnas readiness to accompany him into the presence of bhishma. yudhishthira asked arjuna to see that his chariot was made ready then he, with the twins, etc proceeded to krishnas abode. krishna, accompanied by saatyaki, mounted his chariot, yoked with balaahaka, etc urged by daaruka. the princes set out. arrived near bhishma, krishna, etc alighting from their chariots, saluted ri. by raising their right hands. yudhishthira approached bhishma, eying him timidly . many ri. and saa etc came to bhishma. naarada urged the paandavas to take advantage of the short span of life still left to bhishma for soliciting him to discourse on morality. yudhishthira requested krishna to put questions to bhishma. bhishmas cheerful answer. he enquired of krishna why he was desired to discourse on morality and the duties of kings, krishnas divine self being best fitted to so krishna explained that his motive was only the enhancement of bhishmas glory thou hast always worshipped ri. and . . bhishma consented to discourse on morality and duty, and desired yudhishthira to question him. krishna introduced yudhishthira to bhishma, who comforted yudhi shthira, saying that what he had e he had e in observance of kshatriya duties. yudhishthira humbly approached bhishma and touched his feet bhishma, kissing his head, asked him to take a seat and question him without anxiety . yudhishthira solicited bhishma to discourse on kingly duties which are regarded as the root of all other duties in the world. bhishma, bowing to dharma, krishna, and the brahmans, set forth the general duties of kings he quoted two shlokas of manu fire has sprung from water, the kshatriya from the brahman, and iron from stone these three can exert their force on every other thing but on their origins, it is extinguished and two shlokas of m. ri. ushanas and a shloka of brihaspati . continuation of bhishmas discourse, enjoining readiness for action on kings quoting a shloka sung by ushanas and one by king marutta, agreeably to brihaspatis opinion baahus son, king sagara, who exiled his eldest son asamanjas, who used to drown the children of the citizens in the sarayu ri. uddaalaka who cast off his favourite son shvetaketu, because the latter used to invite brahmans with deceptive promises of entertain ment. the king should administer justice like yama and amass wealth like kubera. he quoted a verse sung in days of old by bhaargava, in the narrative called raamacarita, on king
raajagriha, the metropolis of the maagadhas . girivraja.
raajan, pl. = yaksha, pl .
raajani, a river .
. to the horse sacrifice of king ashtaka vaishvaamitri all kings repaired, also his brothers pratardana, vasumanas, and shibi aushinara. after the sacrifice was completed, these four took naarada on their chariot and asked him who of them should first fall from heaven naarada answered that ashtaka should first come n, because he had praised himself for having given away thousands of kine then pratardana, because he, though he had given to brahmans successively the four horses yoked to his chariot, and then had drawn the chariot himself, had e so with detraction then vasumanas, because he, though he had twice at the svastivaacana for the sake of a flowery chariot given the chariot to naarada, because he praised it, had not e so on a third occasion naarada himself would come n before shibi, because shibi, at the request of vidhaatri in the disguise of a brahman, who was desirous of trying shibi, had cooked his son brihadgarbha as food for the brahman without being angry, though the brahman meanwhile had set fire to shibis abode and treasury and arsenal, and when the brahman ordered shibi himself to eat his sons body shibi was willing to it but the brahman said, thou hast conquered wrath, there is nothing that thou canst not give to the brahmans, and withdrew his hand, and then shibi beheld his son like a child of the gods, while the brahman disappeared and that shibi had not e this for fame or wealth, etc but because this is not practised by the sinful .
raajapura, a city of the kaambojas .
. yudhish thira consulted his counsellors, brothers, ritvijes, ministers, dhaumya, dvaipaayana, etc as to the raajasuya . they all encouraged him to perform it. all people lived happily under his sway and loved him bhima ruled over all men justly, arjuna protected the people from enemies, sahadeva administered justice impartially, nakula behaved towards everybody with humility. there was no extortion, disease, etc. yudhishthira sent a messenger to krishna in dvaaravati, and krishna came to indraprastha accompanied by indrasena, and was consulted by yudhishthira . krishna said that yudhishthira, in order to become samraaj, ought to slay the magadha king jaraasandha, and deliver the princes whom jaraasandha held shut up in a mountain hole in order to sacrifice them to mahaadeva . the now existing kshatriyas are descended from the remnants of those who were exterminated by raama. they represent themselves to be the descendants of aila and ikshvaaku of those there are families. the bhojas, descendants of yayaati, are great and scattered all over the earth but now jaraasandha, ruling the middle land, has overpowered them. his allies are shishupaala, who has become his senaapati the karusha king vakra, who fights by illusion hamsa and dimbhaka dantavakra, karusha, karabha, meghavaahana bhagadatta, the yavana king, the ruler of the west, who bears on his head the most wonderful gem on earth, the old friend of thy father, and who chastises muru and naraka he obeys jaraasandha, but in his heart he is tied by affection to thee the king of anga, vanga, pundra, and of the kiraatas, paundraka vaasudeva, who among the cedis is called purushottama, and always bears, from foolishness, the distinctive signs of krishna bhishmaka, king of the bhojas, the friend of indra, who governs a fourth part of the world, who by his learning has conquered the paandyas, krathas, and kaishikas, and whose brother aakriti is like to raama jaamadagnya, has placed himself under jaraasandha, though krishna, etc his relatives, are engaged every day in ng what is agreeable to him. only yudhishthiras maternal uncle, the kunti king purujit, who has his inions in the west and the south, regards yudhishthira with affection. the following peoples have fled for fear of jaraasandha the eighteen tribes of the northern bhojas have fled towards the west the shurasenas, bhadrakaaras, bodhas, shaalvas, pataccaras, susthalas, mukuttas, kulindas, and kuntis the shaalvaayana kings with their brethren and followers, the southern paancaalas, and the eastern koshalas, have all fled to the kuntis the matsyas and the sannyastapaadas have left their inions in the north and fled into the southern country all the paancaalas have fled in all directions. jaraasandhas relations to the yaadavas were the following kamsa, having persecuted the yaadavas, married asti and praapti, daughters of jaraasandha and sisters of sahadeva, and began also to oppress the old chiefs of the bhojas, who sought the help of krishna, etc. krishna bestowed upon akrura the daughter of aahuka, and with sankarshana he slew kamsa and sunaaman. then jaraasandha took up arms, and the eighteen tribes thought they would be unable to check him even in years. his friends hamsa and dimbhaka were incapable of being slain by weapons. some other king, named hamsa, was slain by raama in the battle of the eighteen tribes then dimbhaka, thinking that he could not live without hamsa, killed himself in the yamunaa, and hamsa, hearing that, also jumped into the yamunaa then jaraasandha returned to his king, and the yaadavas continued to live at mathuraa. but the wi of kamsa, the daughter of jaraasandha, urging him to revenge the death of her husband, the yaadavas fled from mathuraa, and took up their abode in kushasthali, aned by raivata, and strongly fortified the gomanta mountains, three yojanas in length. in the race of krishna there are, brothers . aahuka has sons. caarudeshna with his brother, cakradeva, saatyaki, krishna, rauhineya, and shaamba are seven heroes kritavarman, anaadhrishti, shamika, samitinjaya, kanka, shanku, and kunti are seven mahaarathas then there are also two sons of andhakabhoja and himself all these heroes, remembering the middle country, are now living among the vrishnis . yudhishthira had some scruples, which were opposed by bhima and krishna, who cited from the krita age five kings, who had become emperors yauvanaashvi by the remission of taxes, bhagiratha by protection, kaartavirya by asceticism, bharata by strength, and marutta by prosperity families of kings have been unable to oppose jaraasandha he has already brought eighty six kings to the house of pashupati when he has fourteen more he will offer them as sacrifices . some further objections of yudhishthira are refuted by arjuna . the origin of jaraasandha was the following the magadha king brihadratha, who had three akshauhinis of troops, married the two twin daughters of the king of kaashi, making an engagement never to show a preference for either. as he was childless he repaired to the rishi canda kaushika, the son of kaakshivat gautama, who was sitting under a mango tree. he gave a mango fruit to the king, who gave it to his queens. they then brought forth each one half of a child, which were thrown away, but, found and laid together by the raakshasi jaraa, became one living child . jaraa had been created by svayambhu for the destruction of the daanavas and named grihadevi, and always lived in the kings house and did him good, because there was on the walls a likeness of her endued with youth and in the midst of children, and she was daily worshipped with scents, etc. the king ordered a great festival to be held in magadha in honour of jaraa, and named the boy jaraasandha . some time after canda kaushika again came to magadha, and foretold the greatness of jaraasandha, that weapons should not hurt him, and that he should see rudra. after having installed jaraasandha, brihadratha with his two wives retired to the woods and, after practising ascetic penances, ascended to heaven. when king kamsa was slain by vaasudeva, jaraasandha, from girivraja, whirling a mace ninety nine times, hurled it towards mathuraa, where krishna was residing at that time the mace fell at gadaavasaana, near mathuraa, at a distance of ninety nine yojanas . he, with hamsa and dimbhaka, were more than a match for the three worlds therefore, from policy, the kukuras, andhakas, and vrishnis, chose not to fight with him .
raajasuyasya aarambha .
raajasuyika parva .
. under yudhishthiras rule the people were very happy, and great riches filled the treasury. then yudhishthira resolved upon the celebration of the raajasuya. krishna came there, having appointed aanakadundubhi to the command of the army. then yudhishthira, sitting with dhaumya, krishna dvaipaayana, his brothers, etc asked krishna to install himself in that sacrifice or to permit the paandavas to be installed in it. krishna said that yudhishthira ought to perform it and employ himself in some office. then yudhishthira caused his minister sahadeva to get the articles together that dhaumya might order as required for the sacrifice, and to let indrasena and vishoka and puru, with arjuna for his charioteer, engage in collecting food. dvaipaayana himself became the brahman and appointed learned brahmans as ritvijes susaaman became the saamaga, yaajnavalkya the adhvaryu, paila the hotri accompanied by dhaumya, and their disciples and sons the hotragas who uttered benedictions, etc. then yudhishthira caused sahadeva to dispatch messengers, who invited men of the four castes. then the brahmans installed yudhishthira in the raajasuya sacrifice, the guests arrived, the artificers erected habitations, etc. then yudhishthira despatched nakula to haastinapura in order to fetch bhishma and drona, dhritaraashtra, vidura, kripa, etc. . enumeration of kings who came to yudhishthiras raajasuya . yudhishthira saluted krishna dvaipaayana, etc and appointed dushaasana to attend to the food, etc ashvatthaaman to the brahmans, sanjaya to the kings, bhishma and drona to see what was e and what left une, kripa to attend to the diamonds, etc and the dakshinaas vidura became the disburser, duryodhana the receiver of the tributes, krishna washed the feet of the brahmans. yudhishthira performed the sacrifice with six fires . then the sacrifice was completed, watched by krishna. when the kings departed, the paandavas, com manded by yudhishthira, followed them to the confines of his inions, one after another . krishna asked leave to go to dvaarakaa, being thanked by yudhishthira for his co operation, and having bidden farewell to prithaa, etc and having performed his ablutions, etc he walked round the garuda bannered chariot, which daaruka had fetched, and ascending it set out for dvaaravati, followed on foot by the paandavas, till they took leave. now duryodhana alone, with king subalas son shakuni, remained in the assembly house .
raaji, a prince .
raajnaam aagamana .
raajyalaabha . raajyalambha.
. the paandavas with kunti and krishnaa journeyed towards haastina pura. dhritaraashtra despatched vikarna, citrasena, drona, and kripa to receive them. the inhabitants were filled with joy. in order to prevent any difference between them and their cousins, dhritaraashtra caused them, with krishna in the van, to repair to khaandavaprastha, taking half the king. with dvaipaayanas assistance they measured out a piece of land for their city, which was very beautiful, and came to be called indraprastha. having settled the paandavas there, krishna came back with raama to dvaaravati . when the paandavas were dwelling in happiness at khaandavaprastha, one day the devarshi naarada came to them, and recommended them to make an arrangement so that disunion might not arise among them for the sake of their common wife, mentioning how sunda and upasunda had killed each other for the sake of tilottamaa. yudhishthira asked who those asuras were, and who this tilottamaa was . sunasunaakhyaana . the arrangement the paandavas made was, that if one of them should be sitting with draupadi, and one of the other ones should happen to see it, he would have to retire into the forest for twelve years and live as a brahmacaarin. then naarada went away .
raakaa, a female raakshasa .
raakaa . u, .
raakshasa, adj. .
raakshasendra8, mostly pl .
raakshasi, pl .
raakshasi, sg . names of single raakshasis shurpanakhaa, . dirghajihvaa, . hidimbaa, . jaraa, . trijataa, .
rakshitaa, an apsaras .
rakshovaha, pl a people .
raktaanga1, a serpent .
raama1, son of jamadagni and renukaa, otherwise called parashu raama, which name, however, s not occur in the text of the mhbhr. generally he is only named raama passages where he is mentioned only by synonyms are put within square brackets note the following abbreviations bh. = bhaargava, j. = jaamadagnya . b, . bhishma told satyavati when raama jaamadagnya, angry at the slaughter of his father, had slain with his battle axe the haihaya king arjuna, he exterminated the kshatriyas twenty one times, but the kshatriya race was restored by the kshatriya ladies, cohabiting with the brahmans, . . c, . for the destruction of raavana vishnu corporeally took his birth as the son of king dasharatha. saw him in ayodhyaa when he had been born. then raama bhaargava, the son of ricika and the son of renukaa, went to ayodhyaa with his bow with which he had destroyed the kshatriyas, to see raama daasharathi. dasharatha sent raama to receive him. raama daasharathi stringed raama bhaargavas bow without exertion and enabled him to see him in his true form and to behold, in his body, the adityas, the vasus, the rudras, the saadhyas, the ganas of the maruts, the pitris, hutaashana, the nakshatras and planets, the gandharvas, the raakshasas, the yakshas, the rivers and tirthas, the eternal rishis named vaalakhilyas, who had become identical with brahmaan, the devarshis, the seas and mountains, the vedas with the upanishads, the vashatkaaras, and the sacrifices, the saamans in their living form, the dhanurveda, the clouds, rains, and lightnings then he shot a celestial shaft presented to him by raama bhaargava at this the earth was filled with sounds of thunder, etc and began to quake. raama bhaargava was for a time deprived of his senses, and the shaft came blazing back into raama daasharathis hands. raama bhaargava proceeded to the mahendra mountain, where he dwelt in terror and shame till after a year his pitris, beholding him deprived of energy, caused him to bathe in the sacred river vadhusara, especially in the tirtha diptoda, where bhrigu had practised austerities in the devayuga by this r. regained his energy, . after having lamented and cremated his father, r. vowed to slay the entire kshatriya caste, he then killed the sons of arjuna kaartavirya, and the kshatriyas who followed them, and twenty one times he made the earth devoid of kshatriyas then he made five lakes of blood in samantapancaka, where he offered libations to the bhrigus, and ricika appeared to him and gave him advice. at a sacrifice r. satisfied indra and gave the earth to the ritvijes, and a golden altar, vyaamas in breadth and in height, to kashyapa, which kashyapa allowed the brahmans to divide in shares . after having given the earth to kashyapa. r. dwelt on the mahendra mountain, bis, . b, . also raama jaamadagnya will die without being satiated. the calf having been stolen and his father slain by the kshatriyas he slew the invincible kaartavirya. with his bow he slew, kshatriyas, among them, brahman hating kshatriyas, and dantakrura of the haihayas he slew, with his club, with his sword, by hanging, etc. he proceeded against the kaashmiras, etc and slew them all bringing all the eighteen dvipas of the earth under his subjection, he performed sacrifices, his sacrificial altar and the earth he gave as dakshinaa to kashyapa, etc. having divested the earth of kshatriyas for twenty one times, he gave the earth to the brahmans, and it was kashyapa who accepted it with its seven dvipas. then kashyapa told r. to go out of the earth r. with his arrows caused the ocean to stand aside, and repairing to the mahendra mountain he continued to live there, . b, . b in the race of the bhrigus was jamadagni. his son raama by ascetic penances gratified bhava in order to obtain weapons shiva showed himself to him and promised him all weapons when he would become pure those weapons burn a person who is not deserving of them. with penances, etc and homa performed with mantras raama aed shiva for many years. gratified with him shiva repeatedly proclaimed his virtues in the presence of . and ri. meanwhile the daityas became very mighty and afflicted the gods, who, having failed to vanquish them, repaired to shiva. shiva summoned raama and prevailed upon him to slay the daanavas. then touched by shiva, his wounds were immediately healed, and shiva gave him all the celestial weapons and granted him boons, . cc, . b, . . b, . b, . g, . b, . c, . b, . b, . c, . d having slain arjuna kaartavirya and destroyed his troops he afterwards repeatedly destroyed the kshatriyas begotten by brahmans upon kshatriya women, who had lost their children, twenty one times. then a bodiless voice from heaven which was heard by all people told him to desist, and as he refused, being unable to forgive the slaughter of his father, his pitris told him the old story of king alarka and caused him to practise penances, by which he attained to high success, .
raama2 daasharathi, king of ayodhyaa, son of dasharatha and husband of sitaa bis . r of countless virtues, the elder brother of lakshmana, lived for fourteen years in the woods together with his wife, at the command of his father in order to protect the ascetics he at janasthaana slew, raa. raavana ravished his wife, the princess of videha r. slew him with all his kinsmen and followers. . and ri. applauded r. he performed horse sacrifices, etc. when r. ruled his king, ri and men lived together on earth, nobody died in youth, etc men were each blessed with, children and lived for, years r. reigned, years and then went to heaven, having established his line in eight dynasties, . b, . b, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms ayodhyaadhipati, . dasharathasya putra, . dasharathaatmaja, . daasharathi, . ikshvaakunandana, kaakutstha, kausalyaa nandivardhana, kausalyaamaatri, kosalendra, lakshmanaagraja, raaghava, q.v.
raamahrada1, pl. . the r. had been dug by raama jaamadagnya and filled with the blood of the kshatriyas in order to gratify his father and forefathers, who therefore granted him the boon that his ascetic merit should again be increased, that he should be freed from his sin of having exterminated the kshatriya race, and that his lakes should be tirthas celebrated over the world. then they disappeared. to him who bathing there offers oblations to the pitris, they will grant his desires and eternal heaven, etc . kk, . do sg . v by bathing in the r. and offering water to the pitris in the vipaashaa one is cleansed from his sins. by bathing in the mahaahrada one attains to the end of jamadagni, etc .
raamaka, a mountain .
ramana2, pl a people .
ramanaka, name of a varsha. i on the south of shveta and the north of nishadha is the varsha ramanaka. the men there are white, of good parentage and handsome, without enemies, living for, years, ever cheerful, .
raamaniyaka, name of an island . description of r. by vishva karman it had been made the abode of the makaras, there the serpents first saw the terrible lavana it is aned with many trees which grow only on the hills of malaya, and is dear to the gandharvas .
raamaaabhisheka . having slain raavana, raama was worshipped by ri and g. uttering jaya he gave lankaa to vibhishana, avindhya came with sitaa, whom raama repudiated. laksh mana and the monkeys were sorrowful brahmaan appeared on his chariot, etc. sitaa swore by maatarishvan, etc that she was innocent. a celestial voice was heard, vaayu, etc. attested her innocence. brahmaan said that it was by his grace that raavana had been unslayable but sitaa had been protected by the curse of nalakubara. dasharatha commanded him to take back his wife and rule his king at ayodhyaa, his exile of fourteen years was over. raama gave boons to avindhya and trijataa. brahmaan and the gods, headed by indra, granted raama adherence to virtue and invincibility, and the monkeys were restored to life. sitaa granted to hanumat, that his life might last as long as the fame of raama, and gave him celestial wines and drinks. maatali said thou hast dispelled the sorrows of g y as n and men, and therefore all creatures with as g y raa and pn. will always speak of thee. having made arrangements for the protection of lankaa, raama, etc. recrossed the bridge riding on pushpaka, at the seashore he dismissed the monkeys with presents, then he re entered kishkindhyaa, where he installed angada as yuvaraaja. having reached ayodhyaa he dispatched hanumat as envoy to bharata. then he entered nandigraama and saw bharata and shatrughna, bharata made the king over to him. vasishtha and vaamadeva installed him in the sovereignty under the nakshatra which belongs to vishnu . then he dismissed sugriva, vibhishana, etc and gave pushpaka back to kubera. he then performed ten jaaruthya horse sacrifices on the gomati .
raama raavana yuddha . headed by raavana many small raakshasas and pishaacas, viz. parvana, etc invisible penetrated among the monkeys. vibhishana broke the spell of their invisibility, and they were all slain. raavana with the raakshasas and pishaacas formed the array named after ushanas . raama disposed his troops after the rule of brihaspati . raavana fought with raama, etc then an encounter came about with celestial weapons of great force .
ramata, pl v. raamatha, pl.
ramatha, pl. . next.
raamatha, pl a people .
raamatirtha, name of several tirthas . cc raama bhaargava having repeatedly subjugated the earth and slain all the foremost of kshatriyas in that tirtha performed a vaajapeya and horse sacrifices through the assistance of his preceptor the muni kashyapa whom he gave as sacrificial fee the earth with the oceans. having duly bathed there and made presents to the brahmans, etc raama retired into the woods, .
raamaayana, the well known work of vaalmiki . c, . cf raamacarita.
raamaayana upaakhyaana . raamopaakhyaana1.
rambhaa, an apsaras . b, .
raamopaakhyaana1 . raamaayana upaakhyaana.
raamopaakhyaana2 . b jahnu aja balaakaashva kushika, who performed penances in order to get a son indra became his son gaadhi. bhrigu. vishvaamitra. satyavatiricika. jamadagni. parashu raama. ricika destined a certain portion of the sacrificial food for satyavati, which would give her a son of great wis, the foremost of brahmans and another for her mother, which would give her for a son an invincible kshatriya. then ricika proceeded to the woods to practise penances. king gaadhi, on a tirtha yaatraa, arrived at ricikas retreat with his queen. there the mother of satyavati, from ignorance, exchanged the two portions of the food. ricika predicted that the son of satyavati would become a terrible kshatriya, but asked by satyavati, he granted that not her son but her grandson would become such her mother would give birth to a brahman . besides the other sciences, raama mastered the dhanurveda gratifying mahaadeva on gandhamaadana, he asked him for weapons, especially the axe, which made him unrivalled on earth. meanwhile the virtuous kshatriya, the haihaya king arjuna kaartavirya, who had got, arms through the grace of dattaatreya, having subjugated the whole earth with its mountains and seven islands, became a powerful emperor, and gave away the earth to the brahmans at a horse sacrifice. once, solicited by agni, he gave alms to that deity springing from the points of his shafts, agni burnt villages, etc and also the retreat of aapava, who cursed arjuna, saying that raama should lop off his arms. arjuna, always devoted to peace, always regardful of brahmans, etc did not think of that curse. his sons, always haughty and cruel, seized and brought away the calf of jamadagnis homa cow, without the knowledge of arjuna raama lopped off the arms of arjuna and brought back the calf the sons of arjuna came and slew jamadagni, in the absence of raama, who vowed to free the earth of kshatriyas, and slaughtered all the sons and grandsons of arjuna, and thousands of haihayas, and annihilated all kshatriyas, and then, filled with compassion, retired into the woods. after some thousands of years, the grandson of vishvaamitra and son of raibhya, paraavasu said to raama in public were not pratardana, etc who were assembled at a sacrifice at the time of yayaatis fall, kshatriyas by birth thou art not true of thy vow through fear of kshatriya heroes thou hast betaken thyself to the mountains. raama once more slew kshatriyas by hundreds. those kshatriyas, how ever, that he spared, counted by hundreds, multiplied and became mighty monarchs on earth. raama once more slaughtered them, not sparing the very children. some kshatriya ladies, however, succeeded in protecting their children. having made the earth destitute of kshatriyas twenty one times, raama, at the completion of a horse sacrifice, gave away the earth as a sacrificial present to kashyapa. in order to preserve the remnant of the kshatriyas, kashyapa told raama to repair to the shores of the southern ocean and not to reside within his inion. the ocean suddenly created shurpaaraka for raama. kashyapa gave the earth to the brahmans and then entered the great forest. then shudras and vaishyas began to cohabit with the wives of brahmans unprotected duly by kshatriyas, the earth quickly sank, and was held by kashyapa on his lap, whence she was called urvi. for protections sake she asked kashyapa for a king, saying that she had concealed some haihaya kshatriyas among women paurava, brought up among bears in the rikshavat mountain a son of saudaasa, protected through compassion by paraashara, and named sarvakarman shibis son gopati, brought up in the forest among kine pratardanas son vatsa, brought up among calves in a cow pen dadhivaahanas grandson and divirathas son, concealed on the banks of gangaa by gautama brihadratha, protected by apes on gridhrakuta many kshatriyas belonging to the race of marutta have been brought up by the ocean they are living among artisans and goldsmiths their fathers and grandfathers have been slain for my sake by raama it is my duty to see that their funeral rites are duly performed. kashyapa, seeking out those kshatriyas, installed them duly as kings in days of yore. those kshatriya races that are now extant are the progeny of those princes.
raamopaakhyaanaparvan . as yudhishthira asked maarkandeya if he knew any one more unfortunate than he was, maarkandeya related the story of raama daasharathi king aja of ikshvaakus race had a son dasharatha, who had four virtuous sons raama, lakshmana and shatrughna, and bharata . sitaa, the daughter of the videha king janaka, was created by tvashtri himself to become the wife of raama. prajaapati had a mind born son pulastya, who with a cow begat a son vaishravana . leaving his father, vaishravana went to his grandfather, and angered at this, his father with half of his own self became born as vishravas for wreaking vengeance on vaishravana. but pitaamaha, pleased with vaishravana, gave him immortality and made him the sovereign of wealth, a lokapaala and friend of ishaana, and gave him a son nalakubara, and lankaa for his capital, guarded by hosts of raakshasas, and the vimaana pushpaka capable of going everywhere, and the kingship of the yakshas, etc. . the muni vishravas was greatly enraged against vaishravana. kubera, the king of the raakshasas, always sought to please his father, and, living in lankaa, sent three raakshasa women skilled in singing and dancing to wait upon him. pulastya granted them boons to pushpotkataa two sons kumbhakarna and dasha griva maalini bore one son, vibhishana raakaa became the mother of the twins khara and shurpanakhaa. vibhishana surpassed everybody in beauty and was very pious dashagriva was energetic and strong kumbhakarna was the most powerful in battle and a master of illusion khara was proficient in archery and hostile to brahmans shurpanakhaa troubled the ascetics . learned in the vedas, they lived with their father on gandhamaadana. and there they beheld vaishravana seated with their father, and seized with jealousy, they gratified brahmaan with severe penances, while khara and shurpanakhaa protected and attended on them. after, years dashagriva, cutting off his head, offered it in the fire, and brahmaan appeared and made them desist from their austerities, granting them boons except immortality. now dashagriva defeated kubera in battle and drove him from lankaa kubera then, followed by gandharvas, yakshas, raakshasas, and kinnaras, went to live on gandhamaadana. raavana took from him pushpaka, upon which vaishravana cursed him saying this chariot shall never carry thee, but him who will slay thee in battle, and as thou hast insulted thy elder brother thou shalt soon die. vibhishana followed kubera, who invested him with the command of the yaksha and raakshasa hosts. on the other hand, the man eating raakshasas and pishaacas anointed dashagriva as their sovereign. dashagriva deprived the gods and daityas of their valuable possessions, and because he terrified all creatures, he was called raavana . the brahmarshis, siddhas, and devarshis, with agni as their spokesman, sought the protection of brahmaan, who said that the four armed vishnu had already been incarnate for this object, and caused indra and the gods, gandharvas, and daanavas to beget strong sons, capable of assuming any form at will, on monkeys and bears and the gandharvi dundubhi he caused to be born on earth as the hunch backed mantharaa, who, instructed by brahmaan, went hither and thither ever engaged in fomenting quarrels . asked by yudhishthira, maarkandeya related the sons of dasharatha were conversant with the vedas and the dhanurveda. raama equalled indra and brihaspati. at night, the pushya being in a lucky conjuncture, raama was to be invested as yuvaraaja. mantharaa aroused the jealousy of kaikeyi against kausalyaa, kaikeyi prevailed upon dasharatha that bharata should be anointed and raama be in exile in the forest of dandaka for fourteen years. raama was accompanied by lakshmana and sitaa. dasharatha died. bharata rebuked kaikeyi and set off to find raama, accompanied by kausalyaa, sumitraa, kaikeyi, shatrughna, vasishtha, vaamadeva, etc. he saw raama and lakshmana on the mountain citrakuta, but raama would adhere to the order of his father. bharata then ruled in nandi graama, keeping before him the shoes of raama. raavanagamana . sitaaharana . vishvaavasumokshana . having bathed in the lake pampaa, raama and lakshmana on the mountain rishya muka beheld the monkey king sugriva and his four counsellors, hanumat, etc. sugriva showed raama a piece of cloth that had been dropped by sitaa. sugriva promised to bring back sitaa. raama installed sugriva as king of all the monkeys and promised to slay vaalin. then they all repaired to kishkindhyaa. vaalin came out taaraa told him that it was raama, lakshmana, mainda, dvivida, hanumat, jaambavat, and sugriva who had come to destroy him. vaalin suspected taaraa. near the mountain maalyavat he had an encounter with sugriva. hanumat placed a garland round sugrivas neck, and raama recognized sugriva by that sign and killed vaalin with an arrow. sugriva thus regained kishkindhyaa and taaraa. raama dwelt on maalyavat for four months. sitaasaantvana . sitaa raavanasamvaada . hanumat pratyaagamana . setubandhana . lankaapravesha . raama raavanayuddha . kumbhakarnaranagamana . kumbha karnaadivadha . indrajidyuddha . indrajidvadha . raavanavadha . raamaabhisheka . yudhishthiraashvaasa .
ramyagraama, name of a city .
ranotkata, a warrior of skanda. u, .
rantideva, an ancient king, son of sankriti . r. saankriti had, cooks to distribute food to the brahmans, etc. countless numbers of animals desirous of going to heaven used to come to him of their own accord the number of animals sacrificed in his agnihotras was so large that the secretions from the heaps of skins formed a veritable river, which came to be called carmanvati even when he had on a single day given away to the brahmans a crore of nishkas he thought he had given away very little, etc etc. people who are acquainted with ancient history quote gaathaas regarding r . b, . c king r when divested of all his wealth, gave a small quantity of water with a pure heart, by this gift he went to heaven, . saankriti, saankritya.
rasaatala, the nether world. c, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, .
rataa, wife of prajaapati2 and mother of the vasu ahar .
rathacitraa, a river .
rathaaksha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
rathantara1, name of a saaman . b, . b, . g, . o, . b, . b, .
rathantara2, name of a fire .
rathantari, wife of ilina .
rathasena, a paandava warrior .
rathasthaa, a river. b, .
rathaatirathasankhyaa . next.
. when bhishma had obtained the command, he said to duryodhana that he would command worshipping kumaara. he said that he was as well versed in military affairs as brihaspati, etc. at the request of duryodhana he enumerated the principal rathas and atirathas in duryodhanas army continuation continuation karna he considered only half a ratha, at which karna was enraged, and said he would not fight before bhishma was slain. bhishma rebuked him, but was pacified by duryodhana . at the request of duryodhana, bhishma enumerated the rathas and atirathas of the paandavas . continuation . continuation . continuation. bhishma would not slay shikhandin, for shikhandin was formerly a woman nor would he be able to slay the sons of kunti .
rathavaahana, a paandava warrior .
rathaavarta, name of a tirtha .
rathin, an ancient king .
rati1, a goddess, wife of kaama .
rati2, an apsaras. b, .
ratiguna, a devagandharva .
raatri . u, . nishaa.
raudra4, son of shukra .
raudra5, adj. . c, . d, . d, . u, . b, . d, .
raudra, pl name of a people . audra, pl.
raudraashva, a prince .
raudrakarman, a son of dhritaraashtra .
raudraastra . raudra, adj.
rauhininandana, v. rohininandana.
raumya, pl a class of beings. b, .
raupyaa, name of a river .
raurava, name of a hell .
raavana, king of the raakshasas on lankaa, son of vishravas . b, . also the following synonyms dashagriva, . dashakandhara, . dashaanana, . dashaasya, . paulastya, paulastyatanaya, q.v. rakshapati, . rakshas, raakshasa, raakshasaadhipa, raak shasaadhipati, raakshasashreshtha, raakshasa maheshvara, raakshasapati, raakshasapungava, raakshasaraaja, raakshaseshvara, raakshasendra, q.v.
raavanagamana . fearing intrusion by the people of ayodhyaa, raama daasharathi went away to the wood and visited the hermitage of shara bhanga then he entered the forest of dandaka on the river godaavari, where he, on account of shurpanakhaa, had hostilities with khara, and then dwelling in janasthaana slew, raakshasas together with khara and dushana. shurpanakhaa with mutilated nose and lips repaired to raavana on lankaa. raavana crossed the trikuta and kaala mountains and arrived at gokarna where he met maarica .
raavanavadha . raavana with the raakshasas rushed towards raama and the monkeys raavana from his body created thousands of raakshasas, whom raama slew with a celestial weapon. then raavana produced raakshasas, resembling raama and lakshmana, whom raama slew. maatali came with the chariot of indra, raama thought it to be an illusion, but was reassured by vibhishana, and riding in that chariot he killed raavana with an arrow which he had consecrated with mantras as a brahmaastra. the gods, the gandharvas, indra, the daanavas, the kinnaras, and the caaranas rejoiced .
ravi2, one of the standard bearers of jayadratha .
ravi3, a son of dhritaraashtra .
recaka, pl a people .
renuka1, a naaga .
renuka2, name of an elephant .
renukaa, wife of jamadagni . b, .
renukaatirtha, name of a tirtha . next.
renukaayaas tirtha, name of a tirtha the prec.
renupa, pl a people .
revata1, a mountain in shaakadvipa. b, .
revata2, an ancient king .
revata3, adj v. raivata.
revati, wife of balaraama .
revati, name of a demon of disease .
revati, name of a nakshatra . b, .
rishta, an ancient king .
rocamaana1, name of several princes .
rocamaana2, dual .
rocamaanaa, a maatri. u, .
rocanaamukha, a daitya .
rohi, a river .
rohineya, v. rauhineya.
rohini, daughter of daksha and wife of soma, also name of a nakshatra . b, aanushaasanik.results of making gifts under the constellation of r.result of performing shraaddhas under the constellation of r.description of the caandravratayadaa yujyeta riumaa maheshvarasamv.shashina saadhvi
rohini, wife of vasudeva .
rohini, daughter of hiranyakashipu .
rohitaka, name of a country .
rohitaka, pl a people .
rohitakaaranya, name of a forest .
romasha, pl a people .
romaka, pl a people .
roman, pl a people .
ruci1, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
ruci2, an apsaras. b, .
ruci3, wife of devasharman. b, .
ruciparvan, a paandava warrior, son of kriti .
ruciprabha, a daitya. b, .
rudra, pl a class of gods, followers of shiva . bis, . b, . c, . u, . ff, . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . b, . f, . b, .
rudrakoti, name of two tirthas .
rudramaarga, name of a tirtha .
rudra pada, name of a tirtha .
rudraromaa, a maatri. u, .
rudrasena, a paandava warrior .
rudrasya tirtham .
rudraavarta, name of a tirtha .
rudravata, name of a tirtha .
rukma, a prince . the foll.
rukmaangada, a prince .
rukmaratha1, son of shalya .
rukmaratha, pl a host of kuru warriors .
rukmin, king of bhojakata, son of bhishmaka, and brother of rukmini . b, . g, . d r. was a disciple of druma, that lion among the kimpurushas on the mountain of gandhamaadana. he had obtained from his preceptor the whole fourfold dhanurveda and the celestial bow vijaya, belonging to the great indra, and equal to the gaandiva and the shaarnga . when he obtained vijaya from druma, r. came to the paandavas. formerly when krishna had ravished his sister rukmini, he set out in pursuit having sworn that he would not return without having slain krishna. but he was vanquished and did not return to kundina on the spot where he was vanquished he built the city of bhojakata, .
rukmini, sister of rukmin, wife of krishna, and mother of pradyumna, etc . c, . d, . b, . c, . bhishmakaat majaa, bhojyaa.
rumanvat, son of jamadagni .
runaa, a river .
rupavaahika, pl a people .
rupina, son of ajamidha and keshini .
ruru, a brahman . b, . bhrigunandana.
rushadgu, v. vrishadgu.
rushangu, a brahman. l r. was an old brahman always devoted to ascetic penances. resolved to give up his body he told his sons to take him to prithudaka on the sarasvati . there r. bathed according to due rites and then said to his sons he who would aban his body in prithudaka on the northern bank of the sarasvati while employed in mentally reciting sacred mantras would never again be afflicted with death, .
rushardika, a king .
ribhu, pl a class of gods .
ric, mostly pl . rigveda. do pl. = shiva .
riceyu, a prince . riksha2.
ricika1, a form or son of vivasvat .
ricika2, a rishi, son or descendant of bhrigu, and father of jamadagni and shunashepha . b, . b, . c, . d, . bhaargava, bhaargavarshabha, bhrigushaardula, bhrigunandana, bhriguputra, bhrigusattama, bhrigusuta, brahmarshi, viprarshi.
ricika3, son of bhumanyu .
rishyashringa, v. rishyashringa.
riddhi, a goddess, wife of kubera . b, .
rigveda . b, paathapathitam vratamvitahavyop.e vartate caagryaa shrutir yasya sc. gritsamadas mahaatmanasuvarnotpattipadakramavibhusita
riksha1, a prince, son of ajamidha .
riksha2, a prince, son of ariha .
riksha, pl. .
riksha, pl. .
rikshaa, wife of ajamidha .
rikshaa, a maatri. u, .
rikshavat, name of a mountain . b, .
rishabha1, a serpent .
rishabha2, one or more rishis . b, .
rishabha3, name of a certain cannibal .
rishabha4, a tirtha .
rishabha5, one or more mountains .
rishabha6, an ancient king . b, .
rishabha7, a prince .
rishabha9, a dvipa. i, . next.
rishabhadvipa, name of a place .
rishadgu, a prince. b, .
rishaya sapta, v. saptarshi, pl.
rishigiri, name of a mountain .
rishika, a king .
rishika, pl a people .
rishikulyaa, pl. and sg name of several sacred waters .
rishyashringa, a muni, son of vibhaandaka . d ri the son of kaashyapa born by a hind, caused indra to rain during a drought in the territory of lomapaada, who gave him his daughter shaantaa, . . the viprarshi vibhaandaka kaashyapa practising austerities near a great lake saw the apsaras urvashi, whence his semen fell into the water and was lapped up by a hind, that was drinking. that hind was a daughter of the gods . brahmaan had transformed her into a hind, and when she had given birth to a muni she would be freed. she now gave birth to a son, who was named rishyashringa, because there was a horn on his head. he passed his days in the forest, devoted to brahmacarya, and he had never seen any human being except his father. at that time the king of the angas, lomaapaada, a friend of dasharatha, had been shunned by the brahmans and was without a purohita, because he had been guilty of falsehood towards a brahman and therefore indra did not give rain in his territory. at the advice of a wise brahman he did atonement for his sins and appeased the brahmans. thereafter he assembled his ministers in order to discuss means for bringing ri. to his land. according to their counsel a courtezan with a number of women, etc was sent to ri. . she had constructed a floating hermitage which she moored at a short distance from vibhaan dakas hermitage, and then sent her daughter, a courtezan, to rishyashringa. she refused the fruits, foot washing, etc saying that her religious vows consisted in not receiving such things, but implied that she might embrace him. by giving him unsuitable food, garlands, beautiful garments, and drinks, and by playing and clasping him in her arms, she made him overpowered with love, and as she went away under the pretext of performing the agnihotra, he became sad. when vibhaandaka returned he wondered that ri. was not splitting the logs for fuel, etc and asked who had been there . ri. said that a religious student had come to him he had a mass of hair and a pair of ornaments upon his wrist like his rosary his matted hair was neatly tied up and adhered to the forehead and was divided in two, etc. he wished to go to him and see him every day . vibhaandaka declared that it was a raakshasa, and in vain spent three days in searching for this one. when vibhaandaka had gone out to collect fruits the courtezans allured ri. to enter the bark, which they unmoored, and in this way they brought him to lomapaada, who prepared a beautiful forest named naavyaashrama and kept ri. in the female apartments. suddenly rain poured n. lomapaada gave his daughter shaantaa to ri. when vibhaandaka was going to campaa in order to burn the king, the city, and his whole territory, the king let kine be placed and fields ploughed along the road, and ordered the cowherds to honour vibhaan daka with hospitality when he was fatigued and hungry, and to say that all this belonged to his son and that they were his slaves. thus vibhaandaka was appeased. according to the command of his father ri as soon as a son had been born to him, returned to his father in the wood, and shaantaa followed and obeyed him, as indrasenaa naaraayani was ever obedient to mudgala, etc . kaashyapa, kaashyapaputra, kaashyapaatmaja.
rishyamuka, name of a mountain .
rita, name of a rudra .
riteyu, a rishi .
rituparna, king of ayodhyaa . bhangaasuri, kosala, kosalaadhipati.
ritusthalaa, an apsaras .
ritvan, v. satvan.
sabhadraka, pl v. prabhadraka, pl.
sabhaakriyaaparvan . maya said he was a great artist, the vishvakarman of the daanavas, and asked arjuna to tell him what he was to for him, because he had been rescued by him. arjuna told him to something for krishna, who asked him to build a palace for yudhishthira. maya was introduced to yudhishthira, and recited the history of the asura, i.e. of vrishaparvan . then on an auspicious after the initiatory rites, and having gratified thousands of brahmans, he measured out a piece of land, kishkus square . krishna departed for dvaarakaa . to the north of kailaasa, near mainaaka, there is a huge mountain named hiranyashringa, consisting of jewels. near this mountain is situated the lake bindusaras, where king bhagiratha had dwelt for many years, desiring to behold the gangaa. there the lord of all beings had performed sacrifices, where, for the sake of embellishment, though not according to rule, the sacrificial stakes were made of gems and the altars of gold. there the, eyed shacipati had become perfect by sacrifice. there bhutapati took up his abode after having created all the worlds, and there he dwells, worshipped by thousands of spirits . there nara and naaraayana, brahmaan, yama, and sthaanu perform their sacrifices at the expiration of, yugas. there vaasudeva has performed sattras for many years, and placed thousands and tens of thousands of sacrificial stakes aned with golden garlands and altars of great splenr. there maya, when the daanavas wished to perform a sacrifice on the bank of the bindusaras, had made utensils of gems from the house of vrishaparvan. that wealth, which was guarded by yakshas and raakshasas, he brought away, and thereof constructed the palace of yudhishthira. a club with which vrishaparvan had slain all foes in battle, and which had been placed in bindusaras, maya gave to bhimasena the conch shell devadatta, that came from varuna, and was also there, he gave to arjuna at its sound all creatures trembled in awe. the palace surpassed the sudharmaa of krishna and the palace of brahmaan, and covered an area of, kishkus square. eight thousand raakshasas, called kinkaras, guarded and supported the palace. in it was a tank, whose lotuses were of dark coloured gems, etc. many kings mistook it for solid ground, and fell into it. the palace was constructed in seventeen months . enumeration of rishis and kings from various countries, who were present when yudhishthira, after having fed, brahmans. etc entered the palace. also tamburu, the friend of dhananjaya, and the gandharva citrasena with his ministers, and many other gandharvas and apsarases and kinnaras came there .
sabhaaparvan, the second of the eighteen great parvans of the mhbhr . c, . sabhaa.
sabhaapati2, a kuru warrior .
saashva, an ancient king .
sada, a son of dhritaraashtra .
sadashva, an ancient king .
sadashvormi, an ancient king .
sadaakaantaa, a river .
sadaaniraa, a river .
sadaaniraamayaa, a river .
sadasyormi, v. sadashvormi.
sadbhutotpaadaka, said of the abode of naaraayana, .
saadhya, pl a class of gods .
saadhya, adj. .
saadyaska, a sacrifice performed with soma bought on the same .
sadyaskaara, adj .
sagara1, an ancient king of ayodhyaa . at the request of yudhishthira, lomasha said king s. of the family of the ikshvaakus had no sons. he subdued the haihayas and the taalajangas. his wives were vaidarbhi and shaibyaa. with them he on kailaasa practised ascetic austerities in order to obtain a son, and practising yoga he succeeded in seeing shiva, who said that owing to the muhurta at which s. had addressed his prayers to him, one of the wives of s. would have, sons of exceeding pride, who should perish altogether, and the other wife would have one valorous son, who would perpetuate the race of s. then shiva disappeared and s. and his wives went home. vaidarbhi after some time brought forth a gourd and shaibyaa a beautiful son. as s. was about to throw away the gourd, a voice from the sky told him to take out the seeds and preserve them in steaming vessels partly filled with clarified butter, as they would become, sons . the raajarshi s. did as he was told, and provided a nurse for every receptacle. when they were born their acts were ruthless, they were able to roam about in the sky and harassed the gods, the gandharvas, the raakshasas, and all beings. the gods, etc went to brahmaan, who dismissed them saying that in a short time the sons of s. would be destroyed. when after some time they were protecting s.s sacrificial horse who roamed over the world, the horse suddenly disappeared when it had come to the waterless sea. having told s. that the horse had been stolen, they were commanded to search for it, but they did not find it. s. then filled with wrath forbade them to return without the horse. they then began to dig the sea with spades, etc and killed asuras, uragas, raakshasas, and other beings by hundreds and thousands. after a long time they dug n to paataala in the north eastern region, and seeing the horse there they ran after it without heeding kapila, who was present there. kapila then burnt them to ashes. naarada told it to s who sent for amshumat, the son of his son asamanjas, whom he had abaned according to his duty and for the good of the citizens, . b, also s. of ikshvaakus race fell a prey to death. sixty thousand sons walked behind him. he performed, horse sacrifices and gave precious gifts to the brahmans . through anger he caused the earth to be excavated, and thus she came to have the ocean on her bosom, for this the ocean has come to be called saagara after the name of s . aikshvaaku.
saagara4, v. sagara.
saagara, pl. .
saagaradhvaja, v. saarangadhvaja.
saagaraka, pl a people .
saagaraanupaka, pl a people .
saagarodaka, a tirtha. c, .
saha1, a son of dhritaraashtra อด, .
saha2, name of a fire father of adbhuta .
sahaa, an apsaras .
sahadeva1, paandava . s. pro ceeded against the south and vanquished the shurasenas, etc then the son of jambhaka, etc then bhishmaka, etc. coming to kishkindhaa he for seven days fought with the monkey kings mainda and dvivida, who then paid tribute, . from kishkindhaa s. marched towards maahish mati and fought with king nila, but was exposed to great risk, as agni assisted nila, so that the army of s. all appeared to be on fire, . s. was not afraid, but purifying himself by touching water he praised agni saying that his exertion was for agni, etc . then s. spread some kusha grass, and sat n in front of his troops. and agni did not pass over him, but said that he had only been trying him, and though he should protect this city as long as there was a descendant in nilas line, he nevertheless would accomplish the desire of s. when agni had disappeared, nila came at the command of that deity and paid tribute. then s. went further towards the south and vanquished the king of tripura, etc and then returned to yudhishthira, . d s. in dantakura conquered the kalingas, shooting arrows by both the left and the right hand, . g s. had vanquished the kaashis, the angas, the magadhas, and the kalingas. only four men are his equals in strength, viz. ashvatthaaman, dhrishtaketu, rukmin, and pradyumna, . k steeds of sable bodies and backs variegated like the wings of the tittiri bird, all presented by his gratified brother phaalguna, and superior to those of phaalguna himself, cheerfully carried s อด, อด, อด, . b, . aashvineya, sg. and dual, ashvinisuta, dual, ashvisuta, dual, bharatashreshtha, dual, bharatarshabha, bharatasattama, kauravya, kurunandana, maadravatiputra, sg. and dual, maadravatisuta, sg. and dual, maadreya, sg. and dual, maadrinandana, sg. and dual, maadrinandanaka, dual, maadrinandakara, maadriputra, sg. and dual, maadrisuta, sg. and dual, maadritanuja, dual, nakulaanuja, paandava, sg. and dual, paandunandana, paanduputra, paandusuta, tantipaala, yama, dual, yaamaja, dual.
sahadeva2, king of the magadhas, son of jaraasandha . jaraasandhasuta, jaraasandhaatmaja, jaaraasandhi, maagadha.
sahadeva3, a rishi, .
sahadeva4, an ancient king .
sahaja, a king .
sahajanyaa, an apsaras .
sahasrabaahu1, a warrior of skanda. u . do. = skanda, . do. = shiva, .
sahasracitya1, a prince . next and sahasrajit1.
sahasracitya2, a kaikeya king. naarada said the kekaya king s. was the grandfather of shatayupa, resigning his king to his eldest son, he retired into the woods and after great penances attained to the region of indra, where have often seen him, .
sahasrajit1, a king . sahasracitya1.
saahasraka, a tirtha .
sahasrapad1, a rishi. one day ruru in consequence of his vote for the destruction of the serpents was about to kill an old dundubha, but this objected that he had e him no harm . he told that he was formerly a rishi, named s who had been metamorphosed by the curse of a brahman, . the dundubha said had a friend named khagama one when he was engaged in the agnihotra, made a mock snake of blades of grass in order to frighten him, and he went into a swoon then he cursed me saying that should be turned into a venomless serpent, until had seen ruru. s. then recovered his original form, and told ruru that a braahmana never should take life which was the duty of the kshatriya. uraga.
sahasrapad2, a brahman . the prec.
sahasravaac, a son of dhritaraashtra .
sahma v. suhma, pl.
sahya2, a mountain . g, .
saikata, pl a class of rishis . sikata. pl.
saindhava4, adj. .
saindhavaka, adj. .
saindhavaaranya, name of a forest .
saindhavaayana, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
. the paandavas had seven akshauhinis led by drupada, etc. . yudhishthira consulted with his brothers about the election of a general issimo, who might also withstand bhishma. sahadeva, etc proposed viraata, etc. . krishna named dhrishtadyumna, who was elected. then they marched out to kurukshetra, with bhima in the van, etc. . draupadi with her ladies, etc remained at upaplavya. the kekaya princes, etc. marched behind yudhishthira, keeping him in their centre. in the rear were viraata, etc chariots, etc. anaadhrishti, etc. marched surrounding krishna and arjuna. entering kurukshetra, they blew their conches, also krishna and arjuna paancajanya filled them with joy . yudhishthira encamped on kurukshetra. krishna, etc. each did some special work. at the holy hiranvati, krishna caused a moat to be excavated. there were assembled hundreds upon hundreds of skilled mechanics in receipt of regular wages, and surgeons and physicians, etc. then their allies began to march thither . when krishna had departed, duryodhana urged karina, dushaasana, and shakuni to make preparations for battle, which was fixed to commence the next morning . at the request of yudhishthira, krishna related duryodhanas, etc project of imprisoning him neither bhishma nor drona said any thing on that subject indeed, all of them follow duryodhana, except vidura... war is that which should now take place. yudhishthira gave order to array the troops, but then he complained that he should slay his preceptors, etc. arjuna reminded him of what kunti and vidura had said through krishna, and krishna affirmed it. the paandavas and their soldiers passed the night in great happiness . after that night had passed away, duryodhana arranged his eleven akshauhinis, under kripa, etc. . referring to a contest between the brahmans, whom also the vaishyas and the shudras followed, and the kshatriyas among the haihayas, duryodhana urged bhishma to become their generalissimo. bhishma said that he did not see upon earth the warrior that was equal to him, except arjuna but arjuna would never openly fight with him bhishma said he could, in a trice, destroy the universe with as raa and men but the paandavas he could not exterminate but he would slay every and either karna or bhishma should fight first. karna declared he would not fight before bhishma was slain then he would fight with arjuna. then bhishma was solemnly installed, under a bloody shower, etc. then they marched out to kurukshetra, and duryodhana and karna caused the camps to be measured out on a level part of the plain . when yudhishthira heard that bhishma had been installed in the command of the kuru army, he summoned his brothers and vaasudeva, and selected seven leaders for his seven akshauhinis drupada, etc and above them all dhrishtadyumna and dhananjaya of curly hair was made the leader of all those leaders and krishna the leader of arjuna and driver of his steeds. halaayudha, etc. came there, and yudhishthira, etc. rose from their seats and offered worship to halaayudha. halaayudha said that a fierce slaughter was inevitable, that the paandavas would certainly win because of the help of krishna, that he had repeatedly tried to prevail upon krishna to remain neuter that he would himself but as he could not be without krishna, he would repair to the tirthas of the sarasvati. then he set out for his tirthayaatraa . about this time there came to the paandava camp bhishmakas son rukmin . he entered the camp with an akshauhini of troops, from desire of ng what was agreeable to vaasudeva. he offered arjuna his assistance, if he was afraid. he would slay everyone drona, etc. . arjuna, mentioning his exploits against the g at khaandava, against the nivaatakavacas and kaalakeyas, at viraatas city, and that he had paid his respects for battles sake to rudra, etc would not say he was afraid. rakmin then went to duryodhana, saying the same words, and was rejected in the same way. then the paandavas again consulted, presided over by yudhishthira . dhritaraashtra asked sanjaya to tell him all that had happened in the matter of encamping, and complained that though he understood the defects, he could not with stand duryodhana. sanjaya said that he ought not to impute the fault only to duryodhana as to our acts, some say that everything is ordained by god some that they are the result of free will others that they are the result of those of our past lives .
. after the nuptials of abhimanyu the kurus, etc. next morning assembled in the presence chamber of viraata. krishna spoke about the affairs of the paandavas, and proposed to send an ambassa to duryodhana, etc in order to induce them to give half the king to yudhishthira . baladeva approved of it, and said that the ambassa ought to salute bhishma, etc that yudhishthira had been wrong in challenging shakuni, and that duryodhana only ought to be addressed in a conciliatory tone, that war might be avoided . saatyaki severely blamed baladeva, and asserted that it was yudhishthira who had been challenged in the game at dice, that he could not have declined according to the rules of the kshatriya caste, and that shakuni had won by a trick the kauravas had not obeyed bhishma and drona they ought to be besought by sharp arrows they could not withstand yuyudhaana, etc. . drupada approved of what had been said by baladeva, except that duryodhana should not be addressed mildly, and they ought also to send messengers to shalya, etc. to collect an army his own purohita ought to be sent to dhritaraashtra, duryodhana, bhishma, and drona . having approved of drupadas words, krishna set out for dvaarakaa, and the paandavas and the dhaartaraashtras began to make preparations for war, and collect troops and drupada despatched his purohita to the kurus . drupada gave instructions to his purohita, who set out for haastinapura with a following of disciples . after krishna, etc. had set out for dvaarakaa, arjuna and duryodhana come thither, while krishna was asleep duryodhana sat n at the head of the bed after him arjuna came and stood at the back of the bed. and when krishna awoke, he first saw arjuna. arjuna chose for his partner krishna himself, who was not to fight duryodhana selected for himself krishnas ten crores of naaraayana cowherds. balaraama said he would fight neither for kuntis sons nor for duryodhana. kritavarman gave an akshauhini to duryodhana. krishna promised to become arjunas charioteer arjuna came back to yudhishthira with krishna and the flower of the dashaarha race . shalya with his sons and troops was advancing in order to join the paandavas but duryodhana caused fine palaces of entertainment to be constructed at different spots for his reception shalya first thought this had been arranged by yudhishthira, until duryodhana came forward and showed himself then he promised duryodhana to become the leader of his army. shalya, however, first proceeded to the paandavas at upaplavya, and told them about the matter. he promised yudhishthira that when he became karnas charioteer he would act so that karna might be dispirited and in order to comfort yudhishthira he reminded him that shakra had to endure, together with his wife, very great misery . at the request of yudhishthira, shalya related the ancient story of the great misery endured by indra and his queen . so yudhishthira should also regain his king. this story of the victory of indra, equal to the veda, should be listened to by a king desirous of victory he who reads it with a heart full of religious faith is purified from his sins, etc. shalya repeated his promise to damp the spirits of karna, and went with his army to duryodhana . yuyudhaana, etc. came to yudhishthira with troops . for the paandavas there were thus assembled seven akshauhinis of troops from various directions. in the same way king bhagadatta, etc. came to the dhaartaraashtras. and thus duryodhana had a force which numbered eleven akshauhinis, so that there was no room for them in the city of haastinapura but the pancanada, the whole kurujaangala, etc full of aabundant corn and wealth, was entirely overspread with the army of the kauravas. and this army was beheld by the purohita who had been sent by the paancaala king to the kurus .
sairandhri or sairindhri, . do. said of damayanti, . do. said of draupadi, .
saisikata, pl a people .
saisiridhra, pl v. saisikata, pl.
sakridgraaha, pl a people .
sakrinnandaa, name of a river, .
saalanghaayana, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
sama1, a son of dhritaraashtra .
sama2, v. shama.
samaa, a region. c after these regions is seen a habitation of the name samaa. it is of a starry shape with four corners and thirty three mandalas. there dwell the four world elephants, vaamana, airaavata, etc and also supratika, whose dimensions have for ever remained unascertained there winds blow from all directions and are seized by the elephants with the tips of their trunks and let out over the earth in consequence thereof people draw breath and live, .
samaashvaasa, name of a fire .
saaman, mostly, pl .
samaana1, name of one of the life breaths . b, . b, . g the host of gods named the saadhyas had the son samaana, his son was udaana, his son was vyaana, from him arose apaana, and from apaana praana. praana was childless. this wind
samanga1, name of a herdsman .
samanga2, a rishi . .
samanga, pl a people .
samangaa, a river . .
samantara, pl a people .
samasaurabha, a brahman .
saamaveda . b, aantagam dvijamupamanyuash ca vedaanaam, sc. shiva
samavegavasha, pl a people .
samayapaalanaparvan . asked by janamejaya, vaishampaayana related by the grace of trinabindu and dharma, the paandavas continued to live unrecognized in the city of viraata. yudhishthira distributed the wealth he won from viraata among his brothers. in the fourth month the great festival in honour of brahmaan, which was celebrated with pomp in the country of the matsyas, came about urged by viraata, bhimasena there killed the athlete jimuta and numerous other athletes the king also made him fight with tigers, lions, and elephants. so also arjuna, nakula, and sahadeva pleased the king in their respective occupations .
samayasya paalana .
saamba, sambara, sambarahan, v.sh.
sambarana, sambartta, sambarttaka, v. samv.
sambhalagraama, name of a city. c, .
sambhavaparvan . amshaavatarana . shakuntalo paakhyaana . yayaatyupaakhyaana . uttara yayaatyupaakhyaana . puru vamshaanukirtana . mahaabhishopaakhyaana . shaantanupaakhyaana . bhish motpatti . aapavopaakhyaana . satyavatilaabhopaakhyaana. citraangaaakhyaana . vicitraviryoparama . bhishma satyavati samvaada . animaandavyopaakhyaana . paanduraajyaabhisheka . dhrita raashtravivaaha . karnasambhava . kunti vivaaha . paandu digvijaya . paandu . viduraparinaya . gaandhaari putrotpatti . dushalotpatti . dhritaraashtraputranaamakathana . paandu . vyushitaashvopaakhyaana . paandu . madayanti . paandu . paandavotpatti . paandu . vyaasa . bhimasena rasapaana . sharadvat . drona . ekalavya . drona . astradarshana . drupadashaasana . after a year dhritaraashtra installed yudhishthira as heir apparent. for continuation see bhimasena, arjuna, sahadeva, nakula . the paandavas, headed by arjuna, in war slew sauvira, who had performed a three years sacrifice, notwithstanding the invasion of the gandharvas. the yavana king, whom even paandu had failed to subject, was subdued by arjuna likewise the sauvira vitula, who had always shown a disregard for the kurus and the sauvira sumitra, called dattaamitra . then, assisted by bhima, arjuna with only a single chariot subjugated all the kings of the east backed by, chariots and in the same way those of the south. dhritaraashtras sentiments suddenly became poisoned against the paandavas, and from anxiety he could not sleep . kanikavaakya .
sambodhana, name of a weapon .
samshaptaka, pl a host of kuru warriors . .
samedi, a matri. u, .
samgraha, etc see below under sang.
samhanana, son of manasyu .
samhataapana, a serpent .
samhlaada, an asura . next.
samhraada, an asura . the prec.
samici, an apsaras .
samika, v. shamika.
samira, pl a people.
samitinjaya1, a vrishni . do. = vishnu .
samkalpa, etc see below under sank.
sammohana, name of a weapon .
sampaati1, a vulture, brother of jataayus .
sampaati2, a kuru warrior .
sampriyaa, maadhavi, a princess .
samriddha, a serpent .
samsaptaka, pl samsaptakavadha, v. samsh.
samsthaana, pl a people .
samudra . b the ocean is the home of varuna, the charming abode of the serpents, of the subterranean fire, the asylum of the asuras, the parent of paancajanya formerly it was agitated by govinda in the shape of a wild boar atri could not fathom its bottom in years, it is the bed of vishnu at the dawn of every yuga and the refuge of the mountain mainaaka under the fear of the falling thunderbolt, it offers waters as sacrificial butter to the fire issuing from the mouth of vadavaa, . b, . u, . b, saagara, udadhi. do. = shiva .
samudra, pl. . u, . do. = shiva .
. b repetition from, .
saamudraka, a tirtha .
saamudranishkuta, pl a people .
samudrasena, a king .
samudravega, a warrior of skanda. u, .
samudronnaadana, a warrior of skanda. u, .
samvaha, name of a wind. k the wind which supports the clouds and divides them into diverse portions, which melts them for pouring rain, and once more solidifies them, which is perceived as the sound of the roaring clouds, etc this fourth wind is called s .
samvarana, a king, son of riksha, husband of tapati, and father of kuru . during the reign of s. the king suffered much from famine, pestilence, drought, and disease. the king of the paancaalas invaded the bhaaratas with ten akshauhinis and defeated them. s. with his relatives took shelter in the forests on the banks of the sindhu, where the bhaaratas lived for, years within their fort. then they made vasishtha their purohita, who appointed s. to be sovereign of the whole kshatriya race. s. then retook the ancient capital of bharata and once more made the monarchs pay tribute to him, . aajamidha, aarksha, paurava, pauravanandana, rikshaputra.
samvarta1, a brahmarshi, son of angiras . b, . b, . b, . aangirasa, viprarshi.
samvartaagni, the fire of dissolution, .
samvartaka1, adj . do. subst . do. surya, . do a serpent .
samvarta maruttiya, adj. .
samvartavaata, the wind of dissolution, .
b . vyaasa said in the krita age manu was the ruler prasandhi kshupa ikshvaaku vimsha vivimsha khaninetra suvarcas karandhama avikshit kaarandhama marutta . desirous of performing a sacrifice, marutta, coming to meru, on the northern side of himavat, caused thousands of gold vessels to be forged there on a huge golden hill he performed the rites along with other princes . asked by yudhishthira, vyaasa said as the offspring of prajaapati daksha, . and as challenged each other, so did angiras sons brihaspati and samvarta troubled by his elder brother samvarta went naked to the woods. indra, having vanquished the as appointed brih. as his priest. formerly angiras was the family priest of king karandhama so also of his son avikshit . his son marutta used to defy indra, and indra used to defy marutta, but could not prevail over him. then indra took the promise from brih. that he would not perform priestly offices for marutta . vaishampaayana said then indra was cured for his envy and went home . vyaasa said the ancient tale of the discourse between brih. and marutta is cited in this connection. marutta in vain tried to persuade brih. to officiate at his sacrifice . ri. naarada told him to apply to samvarta, who now, desirous of seeing maheshvara, wandered about in vaaraanasi in the garb of a madman having reached the gate of that city, thou must place a dead body somewhere near it, and the man who shall turn away on seeing the corpse, thou know that man to be samvarta if he should ask thee to follow me, said naarada, thou mayst even tell him without hesitation that have ascended the pyre. vyaasa said by acting thus, marutta found samvarta in a lonely place samvarta covered him with mud and ashes and phlegm and spittle. at last he sat n under a nyagrodha tree . marutta told him the matter samvarta then, as a lunatic, scolding marutta repeatedly with harsh words, told him to go to brih. first, and taking brih.s permission he might come back. as marutta said that he had already been repulsed by brih and that he now desired to sacrifice even with all his goods in order to outstrip indra, samvarta consented, if marutta would agree to all that samvarta would ask him to as brih. and indra were certain to all they could to injure marutta. marutta took an oath to this. samvarta said that marutta would surpass indra, and g. he himself had no desire for wealth, but would only what was disagreeable to indra and brih. . samvarta said there is a peak munjavat on the himaalaya, where shiva is constantly engaged in austerities go thither and appease shiva, whose names are sharva, etc. then thou shalt acquire that gold. marutta acted accordingly brih. became sick from envy indra with . came and was told about the matter . he despatched agni to marutta, asking him to let brih. officiate as his priest instead of samvarta, promising him the greatest rewards samvarta threatened to burn agni with his fearful eye, if he ever came again on such an errand. agni was frightened and returned to indra and brih. and said that marutta had refused and did not care for his promises. indra asked agni to return to marutta, and threatened him with indras thunderbolt if he did not obey agni, afraid of samvarta, suggested that the g. king should go indra said that nobody could burn agni agni asked why then vritra could deprive indra of the sovereignty of heaven indra, mentioning his victories over the kaalakeyas, daa and prahlaada, said that it was because he did not accept soma from a foe, nor strike the weak with his thunderbolt agni reminded him of cyavana at sharyaatis sacrifice and the creation of mada the might of brahmans is greater than that of kshatriyas . then indra sent g. dhritaraashtra on the same errand, but in vain. vyaasa said as the clouds indicated that indra must be near, marutta repaired to samvarta, who comforted him, saying that agni would protect him, and that he would himself dispel the thunder by the winds, and granted him the boon that indra should come in person to his sacrifice and accept the oblations offered to him, and so should all the gods. and so it happened by the power of samvartas incantations. re quested by samvarta, indra himself gave directions to all the gods to erect a hall of assembly, well furnished rooms with a durable staircase for the ascent of g. and aps and to furnish that portion of the sacrificial ground reserved for the dance of aps like unto the palace of indra in heaven indra said that maruttas ancestors and the gods had been highly pleased, and told him to offer a red bull to agni, and a blue bull with a variegated skin to . . then indra and the gods returned home. marutta placed heaps of gold on various spots and distributed immense wealth to the brahmans.
samvedya, a tirtha .
samvritta, a serpent .
samvritti, a goddess .
samyamana, the abode of yama . samyamani.
saamyamani, a kuru warrior.
samyamani, the residence of yama . c, . samyamana.
samyaati1, son of nahusha .
samyaati2, a king, .
sana, a mind born son of brahmaan. b, .
sanaka, a mind born son of brahmaan. b, .
sanandana, a mind born son of brahmaan. b, .
sanaatana1, a muni .
sanaatana2, a mind born son of brahmaan. b, .
sanaatana6 hiranyagarbha, .
sanatkumaara, a rishi, son of brahmaan . u, . b, . b, . b, studied the religion and communicated it to viranaupamanyuo yoginaam asi, sc. shivaaanushaasanik.gaathaa ...so mayyapi abhaashate, some verses sung by him are quotedkrishna vaasudevapramukhaa, sc. rishayasvargaarohanap.after death pradyumna entered s.
sanatsujaata, a rishi b, .
saanatsujaata, adj. .
. as dhritaraashtra wished to hear more, vidura, as he was born in the shudra order, did not venture to say more himself, but he thought of that ancient and eternal rishi who, leading a life of perpetual celibacy, had said that there is no death. the rishi came, was questioned by dhritaraashtra, and discoursed upon death, the efficacy of religious acts, etc. .
sancaaraka, a warrior of skanda. u, .
sanda, pl a people .
sandhyaa, a river .
saangarevas, v. shaarngarava.
sangraha1, a companion of skanda. u, . do. = shiva . do. = vishnu .
sangraamajit1, a prince .
sangraamajit2, brother of karna .
saniya, pl a people .
sanjaya1, a suta, son of gavalgana . the muni like suta s. was born of gavalgana, .
sanjaya2, an ancient king .
sanjaya3, one of the standard bearers of jayadratha .
sanjaya4, a sauvira king, son of vidulaa .
sanjayanti, a city .
. drupadas purohita was honoured by dhritaraashtra, bhishma, and vidura. he mentioned the eternal duties of kings the paandavas had not obtained their share of the paternal wealth the murderous contrivances of the dhaartaraashtras the deceitful game the indignities in the council hall the exile for thirteen years the paandavas desired nothing but a peaceful settlement the paandavas were more powerful men like saatyaki, bhimasena, and the twins were equal in might to, akshauhinis arjuna and krishna nobody could fight . bhishma approved of his speech but karna wrathfully interrupted him. dhritaraashtra pacified bhishma, rebuked karna, sent drupadas purohita back to the paandavas, and summoned sanjaya to the council hall . dhritaraashtra gave instructions to sanjaya, praising the paandavas and krishna and some of their adherents, mentioning the killing of shishupaala, blaming duryodhana, and karna, and ordered him to go to upaplavya to salute them and the five sons of draupadi, and tell them that dhritaraashtra was desirous of peace with the paandavas . sanjaya came to upaplavya and saluted yudhishthira and enquired about bhimasena, etc. . yudhishthira inquired about dhrita raashtra, etc and mentioned the prowess of arjuna, sahadeva, nakula, and the ghoshayaatraa . sanjaya delivered his message and answered yudhishthiras questions . in the presence of the paandavas, etc sanjaya greeted yudhishthira, etc and recommended peace, for what, in sooth, is life after having killed all your kinsfolk he mentioned krishna, etc. on the side of the paandavas, and drona, etc on the side of the kauravas . yudhishthira said that peace was preferable to war, but complained that duryodhana had disregarded the words of vidura, and dhritaraashtra had been desirous solely of satisfying his sons that duryodhanas counsellors were now dushaasana, shakuni, and karna. he compared arjuna, bhima, nakula, and sahadeva with karna and duryodhana. he claimed indraprastha for his king . sanjaya declared that if, without war, the kurus would not yield his share to yudhishthira, then it would be far better for him to live upon alms in the king of the andhakas and the vrishnis than to obtain sovereignty by war . yudhishthira said that virtue and vice, which are both eternal and absolute, exchange their aspects during seasons of distress he would not seek even what belongs to prajaapati, or heaven, or brahmaloka by unrighteous means but he would be guided by krishna, as did saatyaki, etc. krishna was the great judge of the propriety or otherwise of all acts . krishna said he wished prosperity for both the paandavas and dhritaraashtra therefore he desired peace but when dhritaraashtra and his sons were so covetous, war was inevitable some say that work should be shunned and that salvation is attainable by knowledge but the brahmans know this, that though one may have a knowledge of eatable things, yet the hunger will not be appeased unless one actually eats such branches of knowledge as are of use in ng works bear fruit, but not the other ones. in the other world it is by virtue of work that the gods, etc. flourish. yudhishthira is constantly engaged in the study of the veda he is bent on the horse sacrifice and the raajasuya he rides horses and elephants, etc. if the paandavas could see a course of action not involving the slaughter of the sons of kuru, they would at it. but we must take into con sideration the division into four castes and the respective duties allotted to each . war and weapons were invented by indra for putting the dasyus to death. krishna alluded to the game and the role of shakuni there, to the indignities undergone by krishnaa from dushaasana and karna, while the kurus with bhishma at their head did not interfere, and only vidura took her part and that dushaasana had called the paandaras eunuchs at their departure. he would go in person to the kurus. he compared the evil passions of duryodhana, etc with the righteousness of yudhishthira, etc. . king dhritaraashtra with his sons constitute a forest, while the paandavas are its tigers not cut n the forest with its tigers, and let not the tigers be driven away from the forest the tiger out of the wood is easily slain the wood also that is without a tiger is easily cut n. similarly the dhaartaraashtras are as creepers, the paandavas are shaala trees, and the creepers cannot dis pense with a large tree round which it can twine . sanjaya then bade farewell to yudhishthira, etc. . yudhishthira spoke approvingly of sanjayas agreeable speech and excellent conduct as an ambassa, and com pared him to vidura, and declared him to be as dear to them as dhananjaya . he recommended the brahmans to him, and told him to salute drona, etc and the aged, middle aged, and young ladies, the daughters of our house, and the maidservants and manservants, and the many humpbacked and lame ones among them, and those that were defective in limb, or imbecile, and the dwarfs to whom dhritaraashtra gave food and raiment from motives of humanity, the blind, the aged, the many that had the use only of their hands, being destitute of legs, the masterless and weak, those that vainly strived to earn a living, the ignorant, in fact, all those that were in pitiable circum stances, all the ambassas arrived from all sides, etc. he concluded with this message to duryodhana give me back my own indraprastha, or fight with me . yudhishthira said that the creator gives and takes according to his will. he told sanjaya especially to salute dhritaraashtra, bhishma, and vidura, and recommend the paandavas to them, that they might counsel peace and to say to duryodhana that the paandavas were willing to forgive his insults to draupadi and dushaasanas dragging her, disregarding kunti but they must have their proper share of the king give us even a single province of the empire give us even kushasthala, vrikasthala, maakandi, vaaranaavata, and in the fifth place any other village that thou likest even this will end the quarrel. he said that to see the kurus and the paanshaalas live happily united was what he desired . having returned to haastinapura, sanjaya addressed dhritaraashtra at night he praised yudhishthira, who shines in his natural perfection, leaving his load of sins to be borne by thee, while dhritaraashtras acts were contrary to both religion and profit. in delivering the message from yudhishthira he did not mention the alternative of giving them the five villages. he alluded to arjunas ascending to the very heavens and being honoured there. king bali, not finding a primary cause, regarded time to be the cause of everything. to morrow morning the kurus, assembled together in the council hall, will hear the words of ajaatashatru .
sanjivana, name of a jewel .
sanjivini, name of a science .
sanjnaa, wife of vivasvat and mother of the ashvins .
saankaashya, a raajarshi .
sankoca, a daitya . b, .
saankhya, a system of philosophy, propounded by kapila . b, . b, . b, . b, . d, . g, . b, .
saankhya, pl the followers of the saankhya system. b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . do. sg. = shiva, . do a rishi .
sankrama, a companion of skanda. u, .
sankriti, an ancient king .
saankriti1, one or more rishis .
sannateyu, son of raudraashva .
sannihata, name of a fire .
sannihati or sannihityaa, name of a tirtha .
sannyastapaada, pl a people.
santa, a brahman. b, .
santaana, name of a weapon .
santaanaka, adj .
santaanikaa, a maatri. u, .
santarajana, a warrior of skanda. u, .
sanyastapaada, pl. v. sannyastapaada.
saptacaru, a tirtha .
saptaganga, a tirtha . g by giving oblations of water to ones pitris at s. and triganga and indramaarga one obtains amrita, etc .
saptagodaavara, a tirtha .
saptakrit, a vishvadeva .
saptapaala, a muni .
saptaraava, a suparna, son of garuda .
saptarshi, pl. . . b, . . d, . z, . . . b, . . . b, . maharshi, pl rishi, pl.
saptarshi2, sg. .
saptarshikunda, pl a tirtha .
saptasaarasvata, a tirtha on the sarasvati . i the seven sarasvatis cover this universe. whithersoever the sarasvati was summoned, thither she made her appearance. her seven forms are suprabhaa, etc. . i.e. brahmaan
saptavaara, v. saptaraava.
saraka, a tirtha . cf .
saramaa, the bitch of the gods .
saarameya, mostly pl .
saarana, a vrishni, son of vasudeva .
saarana2, a counsellor of raavana .
saarasa, a suparna, son of garuda .
saarasvata, a rishi, son of dadhica and sarasvati . gg in days of yore the muni dadhica, living as a brahmacaarin, had by his austerities afficted indra with fear. as he could not be turned away even by diverse kinds of rewards, indra despatched to him the apsaras alambushaa on the banks of the sarasvati. at the sight of her his seed fell into the sarasvati, the river held it in her womb and brought forth a son whom she brought to the rishis, who granted her a boon, saying that the vishvadevas, the rishis, the gandharvas, and the apsarases would henceforth derive great happiness when oblations of her water were presented to them, and praised her as having sprung from the lake of brahmaan, etc and said that the child should be named s and during a drought of twelve years teach the vedas to many brahmans, and that she should become the foremost of all sacred rivers. the river took the child with her. meanwhile, on the occasion of a war between the gods and the daanavas, indra wandered through the three worlds in search of weapons, but failed to find such weapons as were fit to slay the enemies of the gods, until dadhica, solicited by the gods, gave up his life and indra from his bones caused many kinds of weapons to be made. with the thunderbolt born of braahma energy and inspired with mantras, indra made a loud noise when he hurled it and slew ninety nine heroes among the daityas. after a long time a twelve years drought occurred, and the rishis fled away only s. was retained by the sarasvati, who supplied him with food, giving him large fishes, and he offered oblations to the rishis and the gods. while wandering with famished stomachs, the rishis had lost the knowledge of the vedas and solicited one another to lecture on the vedas. then they learnt them from s becoming his disciples, in number, though he was but a boy, .
saarasvata2, a rishi, son of atri .
saarasvata4, adj. . j, . p, .
saarasvata parva .
sarasvati1, a sacred river . b, . b, . f, . b, . c, . e, . f, . h, . i, . j, . k, . l, . n, . o, . p, . t, . u, . ee, . gg, . b, . b, . b, . b, . m, . b, . j, . plakshaa, plakshajaataa, plakshavati.
sarasvati, the goddess of speech . u, . b, . c, . b, . b, . c, . vaac, vaani. do. = shiva . do appellative, .
sarasvati, pl. . i, . b, .
. maarkan deya related how sarasvati instructed taarkshya about the celestial regions, and especially about the efficiency of different presents to brahmans. then she spoke of the agnihotra she said she had come from the agnihotra to clear away the bts of the brahmarshis, and that she was nourished by sacrifice. taarkshya asked her about the salvation taught by saankhya and yoga she again mentioned the vedic sacrifice .
saarasvatya, adj. . f, .
sarayu, a river . b, . b, .
sariddvipa, v. paridvipa.
saarika, a muni .
saarisrikka or saarisrikva, a shaarngaka, son of mandapaala .
sarita, foll . do. = shiva .
sarpa, one of the rudras .
sarpa, mostly pl . do. sg. said of karkotaka, . do said of nahusha, . do. said of sumukha, . naaga, pannaga.
sarpadevi, name of a tirtha .
sarpamaalin, a muni .
. questioned by shaunaka, sauti enumerated the names of the principal snakes shesha, etc. .
sarpaanta, a suparna, son of garuda .
sarpasattra . b . compelled by the mantras innumerable snakes fell into the fire . candabhaargava was the hotri at the snake sacrifice, the old kautsa the udgaatri, shaarngarava the brahman, and pingala the adhvaryu. vyaasa, etc were the sadasyas. takshaka repaired to indra, who comforted him saying brahmaan was pacified by me for thy sake. vaasuki summoned his sister, who told the matter to aastika aastika comforted vaasuki and went to the snake sacrifice, but was not at first admitted by the r keepers, wherefore he gratified them then he began to ae the king, etc. . comparing his sacrifice to somas, varunas, and prajaapatis in prayaaga of old, and to indras, etc he praised janamejayas protection of his subjects, and his abstinence, and said that he was either varuna or yama, and compared him with indra, khatvaanga, etc. . janame jaya was inclined to confer a boon on aastika but the hotri declared that takshaka was not yet burnt, and the ritvijes declared from the shaastras, and the suta lohitaaksha confirmed it from the puraanas, that takshaka was now hiding in the dwelling of indra. as the hotri with mantras began to pour clarified butter into the fire, indra appeared in his vimaana with the gods, vidyaadharas and apsarases, and takshaka hid himself in the upper garment of indra. janamejaya ordered to throw indra himself into the fire together with takshaka. shaking off takshaka, indra quickly returned to his own abode. takshaka was now falling from heaven, and janamejaya promised to grant to aastika what he might desire. aastika said let no more snakes fall into the fire, and refused to ask for any other boon . enumeration of the principal snakes of vaasukis race that fell into the fire of takshakas race of airaavatas race of kauravyas race of dhritaraashtras race . janamejaya let the sacrifice come to an end he bestowed wealth unto lohitaaksha, etc.
sarpi, sg .
sarpimaalin, v. sarpamaalin.
sarvaa, a river .
sarvabhauma, a prince .
sarvadevaanaam tirtha, name of a tirtha .
sarvadevaanaam tirthaani, name of certain tirthas .
sarvaga2 = . do. = vishnu .
sarvahrada, a tirtha .
sarvakarman1, a prince. b, .
sarvamedha, a sacrifice, .
sarvasangaa, a river .
sarvasaaranga, a serpent .
sarvatobhadra, name of a battle array .
sarvayajna, name of a sacrifice, .
saryaati, v. sharyaati.
satraajit, a vrishni prince .
sattva, a son of dhritaraashtra .
sattvat, saattvat, saattvata, v. satva, satva.
satunga, v. sutunga.
satvan, v. satvaavrihattvaa.
saatvat, pl. = saatvata, pl .
saatvata, adj. . c, . b, dharmam only b c. has shaashvatamdharmamdharma
saatvata, pl a people i.e. saatyakipravara saanaam, i.e. saatyakighatotkacavadhap.karnap.aanaam varishtha, sc. kritavarmankritavarmaa...saanaam mahaa rathanaaraayaniyasarva smukhyaanaamjnaana, the worshippers of krishna=
satya1, name of one or more brahmans . b, .
satya2, name of a fire .
satya3, a kuru warrior .
satyaa, wife of the fire shamyu .
satyabhaamaa, daughter of satraajit, wife of krishna vaasudeva . saatraajiti, satyaa.
satyashravas, a kuru warrior .
satyadeva, a kuru warrior .
satyadharman1, a paancaala prince .
satyadhriti, one or more princes .
satyajit, a paancaala, son of drupada . paancaala, paancaalya.
satyaka, a vrishni, son of shini and father of saatyaki . shine suta .
satyakarman1, a trigarta prince .
saatyaki, a vrishni, properly named yuyudhaana, son of satyaka and grandson of shini. . =, . . vaivaahikap.yuyudhaana, came to the wedding of abhimanyu and uttaraasainyodyogap only b sanjayayaanap.in the army of yudhishthira, yaanasandhip. shiner naptaarammaadhavasya, yuyudhaanam, sammato ndhaka vrishninaambhagavadyaanap.shiner naptaaramaccompanied krishnadiscovered the plan of seizing krishnakeshava saha sisainyanir yaanap.among the seven leaders of yudhishthiras troops yuyudhaana, ulukadutaagamanap rathaatirathasankhyaanap.maadhava, among the heroes in the army of yudhishthiraambopaakhyaanap vrishninaam pravarabhagavadgitaap bhishmavadhap.attacked krita varmanpierced by bhishma pierced by bhishma assisted bhima and dhrishtadyumnafought with the gaandhaaras, shinipravira, attacked bhishmaattacked by bhurishravasencounter with bhurishravaschecked dronathe charioteer of s. slain by bhishmaencounter with bhurishravas who slew ten sons of s.attacked by alambushaencounter with alambusha at the horn of the shringaataka vyuhaattacked by kritavarman and baahlikapierced kripafought with dronafought with dronasaatvata, attacked bhishmapierced kritavarmanpierced by bhishmapierced by drona fought with duryodhanafought with alambusha and bhagadatta, page6 a fought with ashvatthaaman dronaabhishekap pierced kritavarman, pierced by drona samshaptaka vadhap. pramukhaa rathaa, attacked by bhagadatta, abhimanyuvadhap. pratijnaap.arjuna exhorted s. to protect yudhishthirajayadrathavadhap.vrishnivira attacked by dushaasanafought with dushaasanashini pungava, rescued dhrishtadyumnaencounter with dronaattacked by vyaaghradattaslew vyaaghradatta, the son of the maagadha kingyuyudhaanenavrishnivarafought with drona and was rescued by yudhishthira, etc.shinipungavaread sa si with b.at the injunction of yudhishthira s. set out to assist arjunayuyudhaanaencounter with kritavarman, etc.fought with kritavarman and the elephant division headed by rukmarathaslew jalasandhafought with drona, etc. vanquished krita varmanencounter with dronaslew sudarshanavrishnipungavapraised by his charioteer, vanquished the yavanas, the kaambojas, etc.fought with duryodhana, etc.vanquished the samshaptakas, mlecchas, etc.continuationencounter with dushaasana, whom he defeated but did not slayvrishninaam, pravaramshaineyavaarshneyamsaatvatam keshava sislew alambusha defeated the trigartas and proceeded to where arjuna wasvaarshneyampravarm vrishniviraanaamdefeated by bhurishravaspage6 b slew bhurishravas when the latter was sitting in praaya, jayadratha vadhap.rushed at karnayuyudhaanafought with karna, etc.bhima si had slain jalasandha, chap. ghatotkaca vadhap.only b. encounter with somadatta, etc.encounter with somadattaencounter with somadatta, whom he slew, encounter with bhuri, whom he slewsaatvataam varaencounter with karna, etc.encounter with duryodhana, protected ghatotkaca, yuyudhaanashaineyasyashaineyamshaineyasyayuyudhaana, pro ceeded against karna paancaala shaineyaushiniputramshinipraviramshinivrishabhashinivrishabha
satyapaala, a muni .
satyaratha, a trigarta prince .
satyasandha1, son of dhritaraashtra .
satyasandha2, a kuru warrior .
satyasandha4, son of karna .
satyasandha5, a companion of skanda. u, .
satyasena1, various kuru warriors .
satyasena2, a son of karna .
satyavaac1, a devagandharva .
satyavarman, a kuru warrior .
satyavat1, son of dyumatsena and husband of saavitri . b, . citraashva, dyumatsenasuta.
satyavat2, a kuru warrior .
satyavati, daughter of vasu and adrikaa, by paraashara mother of vyaasa, wife of shaantanu and mother of citraangada and vicitraviryasarpasattrakrishnasya...syaa sutasya, i.e. vyaasamatsyamatsya and s. were born by adrikaa from the seed of vasu, s. had a fishy smell and was reared by a fishermanvyaasaby paraashara mother of vyaasa, by the grace of paraashara she remained a virgin and emitted a sweet scent extending over a yojana, thence she was named gandhavati or yojanagandhaa puruvamsh.by shaantanu mother of citraangada and vicitravirya, formerly she had born vyaasaappointed vyaasa to beget children, satyavatilaabhop.shaantanus receiving s. as his wifecitraanga.mother of citraangada and vicitraviryavicitraviryop.bhishma satyavati samv.bhishma consulted with s.vicitraviryasutotpattiasked by s. vyaasa begat children on the wis of vicitraviryadhritaraashtravivaahapaanduvyaasaretired to the forest with her daughters in lawpancendrop.yaa suta, i.e. vyaasaambopaakhyaanap.repetition from foll.drona vadhap.rishe...krishnasya syaa sutasyanaaraayaniyabore vyaasa from paraasharaashvamedhikap.yaa sutasya, i.e. vyaasa
satyavati, daughter of gaadhi and wife of ricika . b, . b, . gaadheyi, gaadhisutaa.
satyavati, wife of naarada .
satyavrata1, an ancient king .
satyavrata2, a son of dhritaraashtra .
satyavrata3, a trigarta prince .
satyepsu, an asura. b, .
satyeshu, a trigarta prince .
satyeyu, a prince .
saubala2, pl. . subalalaatmaja, pl.
saubala3, adj. .
saubalaka, pl the followers of shakuni .
saubalya, pl a people .
saubha, the aerial city of shaalva5. b, . c, . b, .
saubhadra2, name of a tirtha .
saubhara, name of a fire, son of varcas .
. . krishna related when shishupaala, the son of damaghosha, had been slain, his brother, the maarttikaa vata king shaalva, in order to avenge him, came to dvaarakaa in the saubha, who moved at will and slew many of the vrishnis, and sought for krishna desiring to kill him. krishna was in indraprastha at the raajasuya of yudhishthira, and when he learnt this on returning home, he set out to slay him, and found him in an island in the ocean, and blowing his conch paancajanya, slew numerous daanavas. then, as soon as he heard of the game at dice, he had come to the paandavas . . copious description of the combats with shaalva when shaalva attacked dvaarakaa it was well furnished and strongly fortified and defended by gada, shaamba, etc. . caarudeshna, shaamba, and pradyumna rushed out against him. they on both sides fought by means of maayaa. shaamba put kshemarriddhi, the commander of shaalvas troops, to flight by a shower of arrows, and slew a daiteya named vegavat with his mace. caarudeshna slew the daanava vivindhya with a consecrated arrow. then shaalva, riding on saubha, encountered pradyumna . riding on his chariot with a gaping makara in its standard, pradyumna with showers of arrows slew the daanavas and pierced the heart of shaalva so that he fell in a swoon, but he rose again and wounded pradyumna about his throat so that he became senseless . pradyumnas charioteer daaruki, a suta, carried him off the field by the help of his fleet steeds, but when pradyumna had regained his senses, he ordered him to turn the chariot, reminding him of the customs of the vrishnis in battle, and saying that he had restrained kritavarman, the son of hridika, from sallying out, as he would himself resist shaalva . as shaalva used his maayaa of the asuras, pradyumna shot him n with the brahmaastra, and was about to aim another arrow at him, capable of killing any person, when all the hosts of the gods, with indra and dhaneshvara, sent naarada and shvasana, who ordered him to desist as the creator had destined krishna, the son of devaki, to slay him. shaalva then mounted saubha and went away through the skies leaving dvaarakaa . when shaalva had left dvaarakaa, krishna returned from the raajasuya, and found dvaarakaa deprived of its splenr, etc. he learnt from haardikya about the invasion of shaalva, committed the city to the charge of king aahuka and aanakadundubhi, etc bowed to bhava, and set out on his chariot yoked with shaibya and sugriva and with daaruka for his charioteer, blowing the paancajanya, till he arrived at maarttikaavata, and pursued shaalva, who, staying in saubha, remained in the sky above the midst of the ocean a krosha off, so that krishnas soldiers could not see it, but were obliged to stand as mere spectators. after a long battle with arrows, in which krishna killed numerous daanavas, they took to fight by means of illusion, whirling maces, ploughshares, etc and then mountain peaks. as none could ascertain whether it was day or night, or distinguish the points of the horizon, krishna, becoming bewildered, made use of the prajnaastra, by which he regained light . daaruka was covered all over with shafts. then a messenger of aahuka came from dvaarakaa, saying that shaalva had come to dvaarakaa and had slain vasudeva. krishna thought that then saatyaki, baladeva, pradyumna, caarudeshna, shaamba, etc must necessarily have been killed first. now he saw vasudeva falling from saubha, and swooned away but, as he, after regaining consciousness, saw neither saubha, nor shaalva, nor vasudeva, he concluded that it was illusion . though krishna could not see saubha, which had vanished through illusion, he discharged many arrows from the shaarnga. the daanavas set up a loud howl, and when krishna, making use of a weapon that pierced the foe following the sound, killed them at one place, the yell ceased at that place and started from another quarter. then saubha reappeared at praagjyotisha. krishna, daaruka, and the horses were covered by torrents of rocks that concealed them, and the vrishnis fled in all directions. krishna then destroyed the crags with indras thunderbolt, daaruka pointed at shaalva and exhorted krishna to slay him. krishna made use of his aagneya weapon and hurled his discus sudarshana against the city of saubha, that fell cut in twain like the city of tripura by the shafts of maheshvara. then the discus came back into his hands and was hurled against shaalva and cut him in twain. the remaining daanavas fled in fear. krishna returned to the aanarttas. it was for this reason that he could not come to haastinapura and prevent the gambling. then krishna took leave of yudhishthira, etc and set out for dvaarakaa in his chariot yoked with shaibya and sugriva, taking with him subhadraa and abhimanyu. then dhrishtadyumna set out for his own city, taking with him the draupadeyas. and the cedi king, dhrishtaketu, set out for his beautiful city of shuktimati, taking with him his sister . also the kaikeyas went away. but the brahmans, vaishyas, and inhabitants of the country would not leave the paandavas. yudhishthira in due time ordered his men to make the chariots ready .
saucitti, a prince .
saushalya, pl v. saubalya, pl.
saushruti, a kuru warrior .
saugandha, name of a caste, .
. when bhima was embraced by hanumat his fatigue went off. hanumat asked him not to tell anyone that he dwelt there this was the time of the arrival of the gods and of the gandharvas he declared himself willing if bhima might wish it to go to haastinapura and slay the dhaartaraashtras, etc and dive into the army of his foes, giving leonine roars and remaining on the flagstaff of arjunas chariot. then hanumat vanished . description of the proceeding of bhima along the gandhamaadana till he found the lotuses . description of the lotus lake, near kailaasa, guarded by hundreds of thousands of raakshasas, sprung from a cascade near the abode of kubera, the sporting place of kubera, frequented by gandharvas, apsarases, gods, divine rishis, yakshas, kimpuru shas, raakshasas, and kinnaras. bhima drank of the water . the krodhavashas ordered bhima to ask the permission of kubera before he entered the lake but bhima plunged into the water, and as the raakshasas attacked him, he slew of them with his mace, inlaid with golden plates, and then drank of the water, by which his strength was fully restored, and gathered saugandhika lotuses, while the krodhavashas fled through the sky to the peaks of kailaasa and gave account to kubera, who said let bhima take as many lotuses as he likes. the raakshasas then returned to bhima . as there arose a violent wind with gravel, meteors, thunder, darkness, earthquake, dust, and evil omens, yudhishthira, having learned from krishnaa the depart of bhima, and alleging that bhima had not formerly e any wrong to the siddhas, resolved to find out bhima and let ghatotkaca carry krishnaa, while other raakshasas carried the paandavas and the brahmans, and so they proceeded with lomasha to the lake, where the slaughtered yakshas were lying, and yudhishthira entreated bhima never again to offend the gods the paandavas began to sport in the lake, and the warders, with rocks for weapons, bowed n in humility. there they dwelt for a short time on the slopes of gandhamaadana, expecting arjuna . one day when yudhishthira, remembering the tirthas, rivers, etc that they had visited, consulted with bhima how they should repair to the abode of vaishravana, a voice from the sky said that they must first return to badari and thence to the hermitage of vrishaparvan and that of aarshtishena. there came a shower of blossoms. according to the counsel of dhaumya, they all returned to the hermitage of nara and naaraayana .
saugandhikavana, name of a place .
sauhrida, pl a people .
saukanya aakhyaana .
saumya1, a rishi .
saumya, adj. . b, . u, .
saupaaka, name of a caste, .
sauparna, adj. .
ashvatthaaman, etc. proceeded towards the south. at the hour of sunset they reached a spot near the encampment. hearing the shouts in the paandava camp, they proceeded farther and reached a dense forest. dhritaraashtra interrupted sanjaya by expressing his grief for duryodhana, and then inquired about the acts of the three survivors . sanjaya continued ashvatthaaman, etc laid themselves n for rest under a huge banyan kripa and kritavarman fell asleep ashvatthaaman was kept awake by wrath and the desire of vengeance. he saw a fierce owl coming to that banyan and slaying a large number of crows roosting on its branches at this sight he formed the resolution of slaying the paandava army while buried in sleep he roused kripa and kritavarman, unfolded his project before them, and asked for their advice kripa dissuaded him from executing his wicked design let us repair to dhritaraashtra, gaandhaari, and vidura, and ask them as to what we should ashvatthaaman tried to refute kripas arguments . kripa promised to aid ashvatthaaman if the latter would fight the foe the next morning during daylight ashvatthaamans answer he would not desist . kripa earnestly remonstrated with ashvatthaaman, who declared his resolution to be unaltered, yoked his steeds to his chariot, and proceeded alone, saying that he would avenge his father kripa and kritavarman followed him. approaching the paandava camp, ashvatthaaman stopped at the gate . he beheld a being of gigantic frame ready to resist him, and fearlessly fought it it devoured all the weapons of ashvatthaaman, who repented of his rash deed, and resolved to seek the protection of mahaadeva, to whom he recited a hymn . a golden altar appeared before him with a blazing fire on it many mighty beings of extra ordinary appearance came there, worshippers of mahaadeva. ashvatthaaman felt no fear at the sight he offered himself to mahaadeva as a libation on the fire mahaadeva appeared and declared that the period of life of everybody in the camp had ran out he gave a sword to ashvatthaaman and filled him with his own energy many invisible beings and raa. proceeded to his right and left as he set out . he asked kripa and kritavarman to stand at the gate and slay everybody who would seek to escape he entered the paandava camp like a thief and slew dhrishtadyumna, etc. raa. uttered loud roars in joy also y. came there kripa and kritavarman set fire to the paandava camp in three places arjuna is incapable of being vanquished by as g y and raa. before midnight the vast host of the paandavas was slain by ashvatthaaman the camp was invaded by raa. and psh. that gorge upon blood and flesh. ashvatthaaman forgot his grief for his father when morning dawned he issued from the camp and joined kripa and kritavarman. dhritaraashtra asked why ashvatthaaman did not achieve such a feat before sanjaya answered that the absence of the paandavas with krishna, as also the sleep, was the cause of ashvatthaamans success. they congratulated each other and resolved to give notice of the slaughter to duryodhana . they beheld duryo dhana still living, surrounded by wolves, hyenas, etc. they lamented and informed him ashvatthaaman asked him, when he came to heaven, to inform drona and embrace baahlika, etc and informed him who were yet alive and who had been slain . duryodhana regained his senses and praised ashvatthaaman, etc. . saying we shall all meet again in heaven, he gave up his life breaths his soul ascended to heaven. at early dawn sanjaya came to the city and lost his spiritual sight. ashvatthaaman, etc ascended their chariots. dhritaraashtra breathed long and hot sighs .
saura, adj. u, . do pl .
saurabheyi, an apsaras .
saurabheyi, mostly pl .
sauratha, pl a tribe or family among the shibis .
saurya, adj .
sautraamani, name of a sacrifice, .
sauviraka, adj. .
sauviraraaja . b, . do .
savana, a son of bhrigu. b, .
saavarna, a rishi or a manu . next.
saavarni, a rishi or a manu . the prec.
saavitra2, a rudra .
saavitra3, a vasu .
saavitra, adj. . b, .
saavitri, daughter of ashvapati and wife of satyavat .
saavitri, name of a certain mantra, also a goddess, wife of brahmaan . d, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . d, . g, . c, . devi.
saavitriputraka, pl a people .
savitri, one of the aadityas, sometimes identical with vivasvat . b, . b, . b, aaditye sur jyeshtheaanushaasanik.shiva identified with s.atrikrishna vaasudevarashmivaan, krishna identified with s.svargaarohanik. p.krishna identified with s.a mere appellative designing the sunivaivayathaayathaasahasrakiranasyarashmayo sur yathaa
sayana, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
seduka, name of a king .
seka, pl a people .
senaabindu1, one or more kings .
senaabindu2, a paancaala prince .
senaajit, name of one or more kings .
senaani, a son of dhritaraashtra . senaapati.
senaapati1, a son of dhritaraashtra . senaani.
setubandhana . the monkey chiefs began to flock together to raama and sugriva on maalyavat. on a lucky day the army set out. hanumat was in the van, lakshmana in the rear, the army was protected by nala, etc. . arriving at the shore of the milky ocean, raama thought of means of crossing it. he and lakshmana lay n on the seashore, the ocean appeared to him in a vision and said also have sprung from the race of ikshvaaku the monkey nala is a son of tvashtr, whatever he will throw into my waters will support. nala then built a bridge, which to this day is known as nalasetu. at this time vibhishana with four of his counsellors came to raama. sugriva suspected him to be a spy, but raama installed him in the sovereignty of all the raakshasas and made him his own counsellor and the friend of lakshmana. it was under the guidance of vibhishana that the army crossed the bridge in a month. raama then caused the gardens of lankaa to be devastated by his monkeys. raavanas counsellors shuka and saarana came as spies and were seized by vibhishana, but dismissed by raama. raama then sent angada as his envoy to raavana .
seyana, see sayana.
shanda, a son of dhritaraashtra .
shanda, pl a people .
shashti, a goddess .
shashtihrada, a tirtha. p, .
shodasharaajaka parva .
. . naarada told srinjaya the stories of the following kings q.v.
. b . the histories of the same sixteen kings as in shodasharaajika, except that paurava is here named brihadratha and raama jaamadagnya is replaced by sagara .
siddha1, a devagandharva .
siddha2, an ancient king .
siddha5, pl a class of beings, commonly occurring together with the caaranas, etc .
siddha6, pl a people .
siddhagraha, name of a demon .
siddhapaatra, a warrior of skanda. u, .
siddhaartha1, a king .
siddhaartha2, a warrior of skanda. u, .
siddhi1 . q, . u, .
siddhi2, a fire .
sikata, pl a class of rishis .
sikataaksha, name of a place .
silibaaka, a muni .
simha, pl. .
simhacandra, a paandava warrior .
simhaketu2, a paandava warrior .
simhapura, a city .
simhasena1, a paandava warrior .
simhasena2, a paancaalya .
simhikaa, daughter of daksha .
simhikaatanava, pl a family of asuras .
sindhu, the river indus . f, . b, . b, .
sindhu2, the country of the sindhus on the river indus .
sindhudvipa, an ancient king, son of jahnu . b, .
sindhuja, adj. .
sindhuttama, name of a tirtha .
sinivaaka v. silibaaka.
sinivaali, a goddess . u, .
sita1, a warrior of skanda. u, .
sitaa, daughter of janaka, the videha king and wife of raama daasharathi . also the following synonyms janakaatmajaa, . jaanaki, . maithili, . vaidehi, q.v.
sitaa, a goddess . b, .
sitaa, one or more rivers . f, . b, .
sitaaharana . . raavana caused maarica to entice away raama by assuming the shape of a deer with golden horns and a golden skin. seeing this deer raama pursued it, like rudra pursuing the stellar deer in days of yore struck with raamas arrow maarica, imitating raamas voice cried out, calling upon sitaa and lakshmana. lakshmana, thinking that nobody was able to slay raama, at first inclined to stay there and protect sitaa, but as she suspected him, he set out on the track of raama. then raavana, in the guise of an ascetic, with shaven head and with a kundala and a triple staff, came to the hermitage and began to carry away sitaa to lankaa on his way he was seen by the vulture jataayu .
sitaa raavanasamvaada . . while sitaa in lankaa was grieving for raama and was waited on by raakshasis, raavana, afflicted by the shafts of kaama, asked her to accept him as her lord, but was rejected. sitaa continued to dwell there, treated with tenderness by trijataa .
sitaasaantvana . . in lankaa raavana placed sitaa in an abode equal to nandana and caused raakshasis and pishaacis to guard her. the raakshasi trijataa told her of the raakshasa avindhya who had told her of raamas and lakshmanas meeting with sugriva and of the curse of nalakubara which prevented raavana from violating sitaa, and of a dream of evil omens about raavana, kumbhakarna, etc running towards a southern direction, but of good omens about vibhishana and his four counsellors, and raama, lakshmana, and sitaa .
sitavana, name of a tirtha .
skanda1, the senaapati of the gods, son of agni and svaahaa, reared by the krittikaas, armed with a dart and having a peacock for his device. . . . . . . . p, . u in days of yore the seed of maheshvara dropped and fell into a blazing fire agni could not burn it, and at the command of brahmaan threw it into the gangaa, who, unable to bear it, washed it away on mount himavat, where it, on a clump of reeds, developed into s who was seen by the krittikaa, and having assumed six mouths, sucked them all. himavat was transformed into gold, and from this reason mountains became producers of gold. lying on that golden clump of reeds he was praised by g etc. gangaa waited upon him, and earth held him the celestial priest brihaspati performed the usual rites the veda in a fourfold form and the fourfold dhanurveda and all weapons approached him. one day he saw shiva and umaa amid a swarm of ghastly creatures . also the seven maatris were present there, and s . m p r aa si serpents, daa the birds, brahmaan with his two sons, and vishnu and indra, and . g. headed by naarada and . ri and si. headed by brihaspati, and the fathers of the universe who are the gods of even the gods, and the yaamas and dhaamas. shiva, umaa, gangaa, and agni each thought he will come to me, therefore he by his yoga power assumed four forms skanda went to rudra, vishaaka to umaa, shaakha to agni, naigameya to gangaa. daa and raa. made a loud noise. rudra, umaa, agni, and gangaa prevailed upon brahmaan, who had formerly given away the sovereignties of g raa bh y birds, and pn that he gave him the state of a generalissimo among all creatures and brahmaan ordered the kings of the hosts of the gods to wait upon him. then the gods headed by brahmaan, taking skanda with them, came together to himavat for his instal ment on the bank of the sarasvati, which at samantapancaka is celebrated over the three worlds there . and g. cheerfully took their seats . collecting all articles for the investiture according to the scriptures, brihaspati duly poured libations into the fire himavat gave a seat aned with gems, on which kaarttikeya was seated indra, etc. there came together brahmaan, kaashyapa, etc poured water from the sarasvati upon skanda, even as the gods had poured water on the head of varuna, the lord of the waters, in order to invest him with sovereignty brahmaan gave to skanda four mighty companions with speed like the wind, and crowned with ascetic success nandisena, lohitaaksha, ghantaakarna, and kumudamaalin. sthaanu gave to skanda a mighty companion capable of producing illusions, and who, in the great battle between the gods and the asuras, slew with his hands alone millions . then the gods made over to skanda an army consisting of nairritas of a form like that of vishnu. then . with g y raa mu. and p. shouted victory . then yama gave him two companions, both of whom resembled death unmaatha and pramaatha. surya gave him two of his followers, subhraaja and bhaasvara soma gave him two companions mani and sumani, both like summits of kailaasa, with white garlands and white unguents. agni gave to his son the heroic jvaalaajihva and jyotis. amsha gave him five companions parigha, etc. . indra gave him two companions utkrosha and pancaka, armed with thunderbolt and club respectively, and who had in battle slain innumerable enemies of indra. vishnu gave him three companions cakra, etc. . the ashvins gave him vardhana and nandana, who had mastered all the sciences. dhaatr gave him five companions kunda, etc. . tvashtr gave him cakra and anucakra, both capable of producing illusions, etc. mitra gave him suvrata and satyasandha of great learning and ascetic merits, and capable of granting boons. vidhaatri gave him suprabha and shubhakarman. pushan gave him two com panions paanitaka and kaalika, with great powers of illusion . vaayu gave him bala and atibala, with great mouths. varuna gave him yama and atiyama, with mouths like that of the timi. himavat gave him suvarcas and ativarcas. meru gave him kaancana and meghamaalin. manu gave him sthira and atisthira. vindhya gave him ucchringa and atishringa who fought with large stones. samudra gave him sangraha and vigraha, armed with maces. paarvati gave him unmaada, shankukarana, and pushpadanta. vaasuki gave him the snakes jaya and mahaajaya. similarly s r p etc. gave commanders of forces armed with lances, etc. moreover, there were several other combatants shankukarna, etc. . besides, brahmaan gave him thousands upon thousands of mighty companions, devoted to ascetic austerities and regardful of brahmans, of different ages and with different kinds of faces, they spoke various kinds of languages . also the large bands of the mothers, those slayers of foes, by whom the universe is pervaded, became the companions of kumaara the names of the maatris are prabhaavati, etc some of them partook of the nature of yama, some of that of rudra, etc. they were beautiful like aps in voice they resembled the kokila, in prosperity kubera, in battle their energy resembled that of indra, etc they have their abodes on trees and open spots and crossings of four roads, also in caves, crematoriums, mountains, and springs they speak different languages. indra gave to guha a dart for the destruction of the enemies of the gods, and a banner. shiva gave him a large army named dhananjayaa, protected by, warriors equal to rudra himself. vishnu gave him a triumphal garland that enhanced the power of the wearer. umaa gave him two pieces of cloth, of effulgence like that of the sun. gangaa a celestial waterpot produced from amrita. garuda gave him his favourite son citrabarhin, a peacock. aruna gave a cock of sharp talons. varuna gave a snake of great energy. brahmaan gave him, as devoted to the braahman, a black deerskin and victory in all battles. the gods with indra praised kumaara. the g. sung, and aps. danced. skanda granted a boon to all the gods, saying shall slay all your foes. he then, with that vast host, set out for the destruction of the daityas, having exertion, etc. in the van. all dai raa and daa. fled, pursued by the gods. millions of darts issued from skandas dart. he at last slew taaraka, etc. the foes were consumed with flames, produced by skanda many were killed by his roars alone, etc. . balis son, the daiteya baana, took shelter within the kraunca mountain which kaarttikeya pierced with that dart given to him by agni vd. soared into the air k. became very anxious dai. came out and were slain together with that son of the daitya chief and his younger brother. repeatedly hurled from skandas hand, the dart repeatedly came back to him. the gods, g. and m ri honoured skanda, the celestial ladies showered plenty of flowers upon him. some speak of him as sanatkumaara, some as the son of maheshvara, and some as that of agni, or of umaa, or of the krittikaas, or of gangaa. that tirtha on the sarasvati then became a second heaven staying there skanda gave to everybody various kinds of inion and bestowed the three worlds on the foremost of the nairritas, . . . . d skanda threw his dart on the himavat and challenged all beings to draw it up or at least to shake it, . . . . g, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms aagneya, q.v. agnidaayaada, . agnija, . agniputra, agnisuta, q.v. analaputra, analasunu, . analaatmaja, . bhadrashaakha, brahmanya, chaagavaktra, shaakha, shaktidhara, q.v. shaktidhrik, . shaktipaani, . sharavanaalaya, devasenaapati, gaangeya, q.v. guha, . hutaashanasuta, jvalanasunu, jvalanaatmaja, q.v. kaarttikeya, . krittikaaputra, . krittikaasuta, . kumaara, . kumaarapitr, q.v. mahaasena, . naigameya, paavakaatmaja, paavaki, prishthaja, raudra, rudrasunu, senaani, shadaanana, shadvaktra, shanmukha, skandaraaja, vahni nandana, vibudhasattama, vishaakha, q.v.
skanda, names of, found in the kaarttikeyastava avv. a
skaanda, v. skanda1.
. . the planets and upagrahas, maatris and the ganas of the parishads preceded by fire and other terrible gods waited on skanda. indra, with the hosts of the gods approached, mounted on airaavata, in order to kill him. but skanda defeated them by flames, and when indra pierced his right side with his thunderbolt, thence sprang forth an armed youth vishaakha, and indra and the gods sought and obtained the protection of skanda .
skandaapasmara, name of a demon .
. . then svaahaa, the daughter of daksha, who had in vain loved agni from her childhood, prevailed upon skanda that she should live for ever with agni, in so far as offerings with mantras to the gods and pitris should always be coupled with the name of svaahaa. . then skanda was sent by brahmaan to his father rudra for rudra and umaa had entered agni and svaahaa, and from this combination skanda had sprung rudras semen had been thrown back upon the hill, whence sprang forth minjikaa and minjika, and portions of it fell into the blood sea, into the rays of the sun, upon the earth, and upon the trees, whence sprang forth the various troops of his paarishadas, living on flesh. these five classes of spirits should be honoured with sun flowers for the sake of wealth and healing of diseases minjikaa and minjika must be honoured for the welfare of children the females, named vriddhikaas, who were produced in the trees and live on human flesh, must be worshipped by persons who desire to have children. these are the innu merable ganas of pishaacas. . airaavata had two bells named vaijayanti indra gave one of them to vishaakha and the other one to skanda the standards of skanda and vishaakha were red. skanda, surrounded by troops of pishaacas and gods, sat on the golden mountain with the toys that had been given to him by the gods. description of the shveta mountain. . then shiva, with paarvati, rode in their shining chariot, yoked with, lions and managed by kaala, to bhadravata they were preceded by kubera with the guhyakas, and followed by indra and the gods in the right wing of his army was the great yaksha amogha, with the jrimbhakas, yakshas, rakshases, vasus, rudras, etc. there was also yama, with mrityu, surrounded by hundreds of terrible diseases behind yama the trident of shiva, named vijaya, surrounded by varuna, with various aquatic animals the pattisha of rudra surrounded by clubs, etc and followed by the umbrella of rudra, and after this the water vessel, worshipped by the troops and maharshis, and on the right side of this the sceptre, with bhrigus, angirases, and gods. behind these rode rudra in his white chariot, followed by rivers, etc. apsarases, nakshatras, planets, the children of the gods, etc and parjanya. soma held a white umbrella over his head, and agni and vaayu held the two fans. behind him came indra and the raajarshis, and gauri, vidyaa, etc and the sciences . in the front the raakshasa graha advanced, holding the standard. the foremost of yakshas, pingala, the friend of rudra, who is always busy in places where corpses are burned, at one time was ahead of the army and at another behind it. rudra is worshipped by mortals with virtuous actions in various forms. at the request of shiva, skanda took the command of the seventh army corps and was advised always to look up to shiva, then he should attain great welfare. . omens frightened shiva, paarvati, the gods, and the daanavas indra encouraged the gods when about to flee the daanava mahisha crushed, of the gods with a mountain, put indra and the gods to flight, and seized the pole of rudras chariot, while heaven and earth groaned, etc and the maharshis lost their senses, but skanda killed him, cutting off his head that barred the entrance of sixteen yojanas, though the uttara kurus at present pass easily by that gate. the daanavas fell in large numbers from the lance and arrows of skanda the lance always returned to his hand again after killing thousands of enemies the paarishadas of skanda devoured them and drank their blood. when the daanavas were defeated, skanda went to shiva and was embraced and praised by indra. then indra, with the gods, took leave from shiva and left the place, and rudra returned to bhadravata, after having recommended to the gods to render allegiance to skanda just as to himself. in one day skanda had killed the daanavas and conqucred the three worlds .
skandaaksha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
skandha, a serpent .
skandharaaja, v. skandaraaja.
skandhavishaakha, v. skandavishaakha.
. . the paarishadas of skanda when skanda was struck with the thunderbolt, a number of male children were produced, who steal little children, whether born or in the womb, as also a number of female children. they ated vishaakha as their father. bhadra shaakha, with a face like that of a goat, in the battle protected his sons and daughters, in the presence of the mothers. therefore they call skanda kumaarapitri, and those who desire to have sons worship rudra as agni, and umaa as svaahaa . the daughters of the tapa fire obtained from skanda that they became the mothers of the whole world some of them should be good and some evil . having ated skanda as their son, the host of the mothers departed. kaaki, halimaa, etc. had, by the grace of skanda, a terrible son shishu, who is named viraashtaka or, when the goats head is included, navaka . the sixth face of skanda is that of a goat, the best of the six, honoured by the mothers, that by which bhadrashaakha created the divine energy . this happened on the fifth day of the bright half of the mouth, and on the sixth a terrific battle took place . . description of skanda. shri, embodied and looking like a lotus, rendered her allegiance to him. the brahmans and maharshis praised him, saying hiranyagarbha thou who wast born only six nights ago, thou become indra, and at his request they explained to him the offices of indra . even indra besought him to become the lord of the gods. but, at the request of skanda, indra retained his sovereignty, and, with all the gods, anointed skanda as the leader of the celestial forces, and fastened the celestial wreath of gold, of vishvakarmans manu facture, round his neck. rudra came with paarvati and honoured him. skanda is called the son of rudra because agni is called rudra by brahmans, and because he was pro duced by rudra entering fire, and because he was honoured by rudra before all the gods, and because the shveta mountain, where he was reared by the krittikaas, was formed of rudras semen virile. the red cock, given him by agni, formed the ensign of skanda, perched on the top of his chariot. the power which conduces to the victory of the gods, advanced before him. an innate armour entered into his body, and always manifests itself on the battle field. under the recitation of holy texts he was honoured by g aps psh etc. then he married devasenaa, brih. performing the necessary prayers and oblations. then lakshmi began to serve him. therefore the fifth lunar day is called shri pancami, and the sixth a great tithi
. . maarkandeya promised to tell the story of kaarttikeya, the son of adbhuta, begotten of the wives of the brahmarshis. formerly, when the asuras always defeated the gods, indra, anxious to find out a leader for the celestial host, repaired to the maanasa mountain, and, hearing a woman crying for protection, rescued her from the asura keshin, whom he wounded and put to flight . she told indra that she was devasenaa, daughter of prajaapati, and that her sister daityasenaa had let herself be taken away by keshin from the maanasa mountain, where they used to sport with their female friends with the permission of prajaapati. indra said that she was a sisters daughter of his mother daakshaayani. she asked indra to select a husband for her, who was able to conquer the gods, daanavas, yakshas, kinnaras, uragas, rakshas, and daityas. indra was grieved, thinking there was no such husband for her. . then indra perceived the sun rising from the udaya hill, and soma entering the sun on the amaavasyaa at the raudra muhurta, and the gods and asuras fighting on the udaya mountain, the morning twilight tinged with red clouds, the sea blood red bhrigus and angirases offered oblations, and agni took the oblations and entered the sun, whilst the sun was entering the twenty fourth parvan, and sindhu was flowing with a current of fresh blood, etc. indra thought that, if now soma or agni gave birth to a son, this son might become the husband of devasenaa. then he repaired with devasenaa to the world of brahmaan, who promised that it should be as indra had thought. then indra. with devasenaa, repaired to the place where the devarshis vasishtha, etc. lived, and the gods also came thither to drink soma and receive their shares of offerings, and the adbhuta fire came from the solar disc to the aahavaniya and made over the offerings to the gods. he, then saw the wives of the rishis sleeping in their aashramas and fell in love. in order to look at them daily, he entered the gaarhapatya fire, and dwelt there for a long time, and at last, from despair, repaired to a forest in order to away with himself. svaahaa, daughter of daksha, who had in vain loved adbhuta, now resolved upon assuming the guise of the wives of the seven rishis . svaahaa first gratified her desire in the guise of shivaa, the wife of angiras, and then, lest somebody should unduly suspect the braahmana ladies, she went out of the forest in the guise of a bird, and on the shveta mountain, that was covered with clumps of reeds and guarded with seven headed poisonous serpents, raakshasas, pishaacas, etc she threw the semen, which she held in her hand, into a golden basin. then, assuming successively the form of five of the others, she did the same on the first lunar day . only the form of arundhati she was unable to assume because of her ascetic merit and devotion to her husband. the semen produced a child, whom the rishis called skanda, with six heads, etc. on the second day it first assumed a form, on the rd it looked like a little child, on the fourth the limbs were developed. seizing the bow used by the destroyer of tripura, skanda uttered a terrible roar, so that the great naagas citra and airaavata sprang up. but skanda seized them with two of his hands, and holding a dart in one hand, a cock in another, etc and blowing a conch shell, he terrified the creatures with his roars. the persons of various orders, who then sought the protection of skanda, are called his followers by the brahmans . discharging his arrows in the direction of the shveta mountain, he rent asunder the mountain kraunca, the son of himavat therefore the swans and vultures go to the mountain meru. the other mountains also screamed aloud. then, with his lance, he rent in twain one of the peaks of the shveta mountain. mount shveta and the other mountains left the earth and fled the earth was torn asunder on all sides she went to skanda and regained her power the mountains bowed n to skanda and came back to the earth, and all creatures worshipped skanda on the fifth day of the lunar month . . terrific prodigies were seen everywhere. the rishis tried to restore tranquillity to the universe. the inhabitants of the caitra ratha forest accused the wives of the six rishis, other ones the fowl of being the cause thereof but nobody suspected svaahaa. the seven rishis divorced their wives with the exception of arundhati, though svaahaa claimed the child as hers. vishvaamitra, having concluded the sacrifice of the seven rishis, had secretly followed the god of fire, and knew everything as it had happened. he sought the protection of skanda, and performed for him the thirteen auspicious rites of childhood the jaalakarman, etc etc. though vishvaamitra informed the seven rishis of the innocence of their wives, yet they abaned them unconditionally. . the gods asked indra to kill skanda, but he dared not attack him, saying that skanda was able to destroy even the creator of the world. then they let the mothers of the world approach in order to kill skanda, but they ated him as their son and let him suck their breasts, especially the daughter of krodha with a spike in her hand, and the daughter of the red sea, who lived on blood and his father agni came and, transformed into naigameya with a goats month, gratified him with toys .
smriti . u, .
sodha, pl a people .
soma1, originally the soma juice, generally identified with the moon obtained the religion of naaraayana from the vaikhaanasastaarakavadhop.candramaa, gave a sheep to skandasutaa taaraadhipasyevaumaa maheshvarasamv.rohini shashina saadhvi
somaa, an apsaras .
somabhojana, a suparna, son of garuda .
somaashrama, a tirtha .
somashravas, a brahman, son of shrutashravas .
somaashraayaayana, a tirtha .
somadatta, a prince . e, . baalhika, baalhikaatmaja, kaurava, kauraveya, kauravya, kurupungava.
somadatti v. saumadatti.
somadheya, pl a people .
somagiri, a mountain .
somaka, an ancient king, son of sahadeva . saahadevi.
somaka, pl a tribe or family of the paancaalas, often used synonymous with these, but also mentioned together with them . d, อด, .
somaka, sg. = janamejaya the paancaala
somakirti, a son of dhritaraashtra .
somaloka . ff, . n, . . b, .
somaanvaya . b, . somakula, somavamsha.
somapa1, a warrior of skanda. u, .
somapa2, a vishvadeva .
somapaa, a class of pitris or rishis . b, . b, . b, .
somapada, a tirtha .
somapithin . o gautama said there where rathantara and brihat are sung, where one strews the altar for pundarikas, where the drinker of soma comes with steeds, .
somatirtha, name of various tirthas .
somavamsha . b, odbhava, sc. nahusha
somavarcas, a vishvadeva .
somavaayavyaa, pl a class of rishis, .
somavithi, v. somapithin.
sparshaashana, pl a class of gods .
sraja, a vishvadeva .
srinjaya1, one or more ancient kings . cf, srinjaya.
srinjaya2, one of the standard bearers of jayadratha .
srinjaya3, father of suvarnashthivin. there was a king of the name shaibya, his son was s. the rishis naarada and parvata were the friends of s. seeing the daughter of s parvata asked if she was shri, etc. . naarada obtained her as his wife. parvata cursed naarada, saying that he should not go to heaven at his will, and naarada cursed parvata, saying that he should not go to heaven without him. meanwhile, king s desirous of a son, prevailed upon the brahmans to ask naarada on his behalf, and, urged by naarada, he prayed for a son possessed of every accomplishment, and whose urine, etc. should be of gold. this son was named suvarnashthivin, and increased the wealth beyond all limits . some robbers seized the prince and slew him, and cut his body into fragments but without finding any gold. the robbers then slew one another and sank into an unimaginably awful hell. to srinjaya, who was afflicted with deep sorrow, the . ri. naarada told the shodasharaajika, i.e the histories of sixteen kings who had died, ending each narrative with the words as he died who was superior to thee and to thy son, thou shouldst not grieve for the latter who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial present. . the grief of srinjaya was dispelled and naarada restored his son to life, .
srinjaya6, vide sanjaya .
srinjaya, pl a tribe or family among the paancaalas, often used synonymous with these, but also mentioned together with them .
srishti, a goddess .
stambamitra, a shaarngaka, son of mandapala and jaritaa .
stanakunda, sg. and pl name of a tirtha .
stanaposhika or stanayoshika, pl a people .
stena, pl name of a caste, .
sthandileyu, a prince .
sthaanu1, name of a rudra .
sthaanutirtha, name of a tirtha. p, .
sthaanuvata, a tirtha .
sthira1, a companion of skanda. u, .
sthulabaaluka v. sthulavaaluka.
sthulashiras, a rishi . b, maharshi, cursed the trees, saying that they should not put forth flowers at all timesaanushaasanik.v.l. sthulagiraa, b. came to see bhishma
sthulakarna, sthulaakarna, v. sthun.
sthulakesha, a rishi .
sthulaaksha, a rishi .
sthulavaalukaa, a river . m, .
sthuna1, name of a yaksha . sthunakarna.
sthuna2, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
sthunakarna, a brahman .
sthunaakarna, name of a weapon .
stobha, name of a certain sacrificial exclamation, .
striparvan, the book of the mhbhr . c, .
striraajya, sg. name of a country, or pl. a people .
. aided by the spiritual sight granted by vyaasa, gaandhaari beheld the field of battle, though distant, from the spot where she stood, with raa psh jackals, etc. dhritaraashtra, at the command of vyaasa, with the paandavas, with krishna and all the kuru ladies, proceeded to the field of battle. the paancaala and the kuru ladies were plunged into unutterable distress, described by the daughter of subala, i.e. gaandhaari, to krishna, mentioning bhishma, etc. then her eyes fell upon duryodhana . gaandhaaris lament at the sight of duryodhana of her sons and daughters in law, etc especially dushaasana of vikarna, etc. of abhimanyu, etc directing krishnas attention to the laments of uttaraa of karna of the lord of the avantis, etc jayadratha, and dushalaa of shalya, bhishma, etc and drona, whose disciples, with kripi, were burning his body on the bank of the gangaa of somadatta and bhurishravas, and the mother and wives of bhurishravas, and shakuni of the kaamboja king, etc. . then gaandhaari cursed krishna for not having prevented the slaughter of the kurus and the paandavas, saying on the thirty sixth year from this thou shalt, after causing the slaughter of thy kinsmen, etc perish in a disgraceful way within the wilderness, etc. krishna said there is none in the world, save myself, who is capable of exterminating the vrishnis am endeavouring to bring it about in proclaiming this curse, thou hast aided me in the accomplish ment of that task the paandavas became stupefied .
stubha, name of a fire .
stutishaastra, pl .
subaahu1, a serpent .
subaahu2, an apsaras .
subaahu3, various kings at the time of yudhishthira . subaahu5, subaahu8 .
subaahu4, son of dhritaraashtra. .
subaahu5, a kaashi king .
subaahu6, a cedi king at the time of nala . cedipati, cediraaja.
subaahu7, king of the kulindas . kiraataraajan, kulindaadhipati.
subaahu8, a kuru warrior .
subaahu9, a paandava warrior .
subaahu1, a warrior of skanda. u, .
subaahu1, an ancient king .
subala1, an ancient king .
subala2, king of the gaandhaaras and father of shakuni and gaandhaari . gaandhaa raraaja.
subala3, a king .
subala4, a suparna, son of garuda .
subalaatmaja, pl. .
subhaa, wife of angiras .
subhadra, name of a place.
subhadraa, daughter of vasudeva, wife of arjuna, and mother of abhimanyu . also the following synonyms abhimanyujanani, . bhadraa, . maadhavi, saatvataatmajaa, saatvati, vaarshneyi, vaasudevasahodaraa vasudevasutaa, yaadavi, yadunandani, q.v.
subhadraa, name of a, cow .
. some days afterwards a mountain festival of the bhojas, vrishnis, and andhakas was held on the raivataka mountain there haladhara with revati, followed by gandharvas, king ugrasena, with his wives, raukmineya, shaamba, akrura, saarana, gada, babhru, viduratha, nishatha, caarudeshna, prithu, viprithu, satyaka, saatyaki, bhangakaara, mahaarava, haardikya, uddhava, etc were present arjuna fell in love with subhadraa, the favourite daughter of vasudeva, the sister of krishna, and uterine sister of saarana. krishna told him to carry her away by force, as the result of a svayamvara was btful. they sent a courier to yudhishthira at indraprastha, and obtained his assent . arjuna set out as for a hunting expedi tion in his chariot, yoked with shaibya and sugriva, and carried away subhadraa towards indraprastha. the soldiers ran to dvaarakaa to the sabhaa, named sudharmaa, and informed the saabhaapaala, who, by blowing the drum of alarm caused the vrishnis, andhakas, and bhojas to assemble at the sabhaa. while they made a loud uproar, baladeva restored silence by saying that they ought first to hear what krishna purposed. then, seeing krishna sitting silent, he spoke angrily about this deed of arjuna .
subhaga, brother of shakuni v. b .
subhagaa, an apsaras, daughter of praadhaa .
subhagaa, a maatri. u, .
subhava, a king .
subhima, a god .
subhraaja, a companion of skanda. u, .
subhru, a maatri. u, .
subhumika, a tirtha on the sarasvati. c in that tirtha many aps are sporting . and g. repair thither every month it is the resort of brahmaan himself g. and diverse tribes of aps. are to be seen there, passing the time happily . and p. sport there in joy, sacred flowers being strewn over them baladeva heard the sound of those celestial songs and musical instruments, and saw many shas of g and raa .
sucakra, a warrior of skanda. u, .
sucandra1, an asura .
sucandra2, a devagandharva .
sucaaru1, son of krishna and rakmini .
sucaaru2, son of dhritaraashtra .
sucetas, a brahman, son of gritsamada. b, .
suci, name of a vyuha, .
sucimukha, name of a vyuha, .
sucitra1, a serpent .
sucitra2, one or more kings .
sucitra3, son of dhritaraashtra .
sucivaktra, a warrior of skanda. u, .
susharman1, king of the trigartas . prastha laadhipa, prasthalaadhipati, rukmaratha, traigarta, trigarta, trigartaadhipati, trigartaraaj, trigartaraaja, trigartaraajan.
susharman2, a paandava warrior . next.
susharman3, a paancaala prince .
sushobhanaa, daughter of the frog king aayu and wife of king parikshit of ayodhyaa .
sushravaa, daughter of a vidarbha king .
sushruta, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
sudakshina1, a kaamboja prince . kaamboja, kaambojaraaja.
sudakshina2, a paandava warrior .
sudaamaa, name of two maatrs. u, .
sudaaman1, a king .
sudaaman2, king of the dashaarnas .
sudaaman, pl a people .
sudarsha1, a kuru warrior . next.
sudarsha2, a son of dhritaraashtra . the prec.
sudarshana1, the discus of vishnu . d krishnas discus was given to him by mahaadeva when the latter had slain a daitya who lived in the water. originally it was created by vrishaanka . only pinaakin can gaze at it. bhava gave it the name sudarshana, . cakra .
sudarshana2, a prince .
sudarshana3, the chariot of indra .
sudarshana4, a prince . c, .
sudarshana6, the jambu tree on meru. i, . sudarshanaa.
sudarshana7, son of dhritaraashtra .
sudarshana8, a kuru warrior.
sudarshana9, a paandava warrior.
sudarshana1, a maalava king . maalava.
sudarshana1, son of agni and sudarcanaa. b, . aagneya agniputra, paavakasuta, paavaki.
sudarshanaa, daughter of king duryodhana of maahishmati and the river narmadaa. b, . duryodhanasutaa
. b . bhishma said prajaapati manu ikshvaaku sons the tenth of those, dashaashva, became the king of maahishmati dashaashvas son was the pious madiraashva dyutimat suvira sudurjaya r ri duryodhana, in whose king there was no miser, etc and who was learned in the vedas and vedaanta. duryodhana begat the beautiful sudarshanaa upon the river narmadaa agni, taking the shape of a brahman, demanded her hand from the king, who would not give her to him then agni vanished from his great sacrifice. duryodhana repaired to the brahmans, who became informed of the matter by agni then the king consented, and agni gave, as a marriage er, the boon to the king that he would always remain there, and agni has always been present there to this and was seen by sahadeva on his digvijaya. she bore to agni the beautiful sudarshana, who, even in his childhood, knew braahman. sudarshana married oghavati, the daughter of king oghavat and the sister of ogharatha, and dwelt in kurukshetra he took the vow of conquering death by leading the life of a householder. he instructed oghavati that, for pleasing a guest, she must not spare even her own person. one when sudarshana went out to fetch firewood, a graceful brahman came to oghavati and required and obtained her own person. mrityu, with his iron club, was always at the side of sudarshana, watching him in order to find out his flaws. when sudarshana came home he showed no anger. the brahman turned out to be dharma, who was pleased with sudarshana, and said you have conquered mrityu oghavati has been protected from defilement by your virtue and by her own chastity you will attain to all the worlds in this your body, and, as yoga is in the control of oghavati, she will follow you with half her corporeal self, being with the other half oghavati. then indra came, riding in a fine chariot, and approached that brahman.
sudaasa, king of the koshalas .
sudella, pl v. sudeshna, pl.
sudeshna, pl a people .
sudeshnaa, wife of the anga king bali .
sudeshnaa, wife of viraata . kaikeyi.
sudeshta, pl a people .
sudeva1, a brahman .
sudeva2, the generalissimo of ambarisha .
sudeva3, king of the kaashis. b, . kaashinandana, kaashiraaja.
sudevaa, an anga princess .
sudevaa, a daashaarha princess .
sudhaa, a delicious drink or nectarlike substance, .
sudhanus, a kuru warrior .
sudhanvan1, a brahman of angiras race . b, . b, . aangirasa.
sudhanvan2, a kuru warrior . sudhanus.
sudhanvan3, a paancaala prince . paancaalya.
sudhanvan4, an ancient king .
sudharmaa, the sabhaa of the dashaarhas, .
sudharmaa, wife of maatali .
sudharman1, a vrishni prince .
sudharman2, king of the dashaarnas. .
sudharman3, a kuru warrior .
sudharman4, a paandava warrior .
sudharman6, v. susharman2.
sudhaavat, v. svadhaavat.
sudina, a tirtha .
sudivaatandi, a rishi .
sudrishta, pl a people .
sudurjaya, king of maahishmati, . b, . durjaya.
sudyumna, an ancient king, son of manu vaivasvata . b, .
suganaa, a maatri. u, .
sugandha, name of a tirtha .
sugandhaa, an apsaras .
sugandhaa, a tirtha .
sughosha, the conch of nakula .
sugoptri, a vishvadeva .
sugriva1, one of krishnas horses . also shaibya sugrivavaahana .
sugriva2, a monkey chief in kishkindhaa, brother of vaalin, . suryaputra.
suhanu, an asura .
suhara, an asura .
suhasta, son of dhritaraashtra .
suhavis, son of bhumanyu .
sushala, v. dushala.
suhma, a prince .
suhma, pl a people .
suhotra1, an ancient king, son of bhumanyu . king s. was invincible in battle, etc the very gods used to come to see him he freed the earth from mlecchas and forest thieves parjanya showered gold to him from years end to years end the rivers were gold in those olden days and were open to the use of everybody his tanks were a krosha in extension that unlimited wealth of gold the raajarshi s. gave away to the brahmans at a sacrifice at kurujaangala he performed horse sacrifices, raajasuyas, many kshatriya sacrifices, etc and attained to a desirable end, . b, . atithin.
suhotra2, son of sahadeva paandava .
suhotra3, a brahman .
suhotra4, a kuru king . kaurava, kauravya.
suhotra5, a daitya. b, .
suhotri, son of bhumanyu .
sujaata, son of dhritaraashtra .
sujaataa, daughter of uddaalaka, wife of kaoda, and mother of ashtaavakra .
sukandaka, pl a people .
sukanyaa, daughter of sharyaati and wife of cyavana . sharyaatitanayaa.
sukanyaa, wife of maatarishvan. j, .
. . lomasha related when cyavana, the son of the maharshi bhrigu practised austerities by the side of this lake, and, assuming the posture virasthaana, had been enveloped by an anthill, king sharyaati came to the lake with his, wives and his only daughter sukanyaa. the viprarshi cyavana, seeing sukanyaa, was gladdened and spoke to her, but she did not hear him. then sukanyaa, seeing his eyes in the anthill, pierced them with thorns from curiosity. he, becoming very angry, obstructed the excre ments and urine of sharyaatis soldiers, and sharyaati at last discovered the cause of their distress, and only obtained deliverance therefrom by bestowing sukanyaa upon cyavana. then sharyaati, with his troops, went to his city, and sukanyaa remained with cyavana . once, when the ashvins had seen sukanyaa, after she had bathed, they asked her to choose one of them for her husband, and as she refused, they entered the water together with cyavana, and when they all came out of the tank young and beautiful they asked her to choose one of them and she choose cyavana. cyavana promised them to make them drinkers of soma in the presence of indra. then the ashvins, highly delighted, ascended to heaven . when sharyaati heard that cyavana had been turned into a youth, he came with his wife and troops to see him, and became very glad. cyavana caused him to perform a sacrifice with cyavana as his priest. when cyavana was about to take up soma in order to offer it to the ashvins, indra forbade it, saying, that they were physicians and servants, assumed forms at pleasure, and roamed about in the world of mortals, and as cyavana did not obey he prepared to hurl his thunderbolt at him, but cyavana paralysed his arm and fulfilled his intention. then he created a krityaa, a great asura named mada this rushed forth to devour indra, who only was delivered when he had sanctioned that the ashvins should henceforth be entitled to the soma juice, saying that he had only intended to spread the fame of cyavana and sharyaati. cyavana dis tributed mada in drinks, women, gambling, and hunting.
sukarman, a prince .
sukeshi, an apsaras. b, .
suketu1, a prince .
suketu2, son of shishupaala .
suketu3, son of citraketu .
sukhadaa, a maatri. u, .
sukhasecaka, a serpent .
sukratu1, an ancient king .
sukratu2, a prince .
sukshatra, son of the kosala king .
sukshma1, an asura .
sukumaara1, a serpent .
sukumaara2, one or more princes .
sukumaara3, a kaashi prince .
sukumaara4, a varsha in shaakadvipa. b
sukumaari, a river in shaakadvipa. b, .
sukumaari, daughter of srinjaya. b, .
sukundala, a son of dhritaraashtra .
sukusumaa, a maatri. u, .
sukutta, pl a people .
sukutya, pl a people .
sulabhaa, a female mendicant. b, .
sulabhaa janaka samvaada . b . bhishma related the old narrative of the discourse in days of yore, in dharma yuga, between king janaka maithila dharmadhvaja, whom many wise men desired to imitate, and the female mendicant sulabhaa, who practised yoga and wandered over the earth, and had heard from many tridandins about janaka. by her yoga power she assumed a beautiful form and instantly repaired to mithilaa, and, on pretence of begging alms, presented herself before the king, who was surrounded by his ministers and learned scholars. by yoga she entered the kings consciousness by her own consciousness . then they conversed upon emancipation. the king said he was a disciple of the bhikshu pancashikha of paraasharas race, and fully conversant with saankhya and yoga, etc. pancashikha had dwelt with him for four months in the rainy season. sulabhaa enumerated thirty principles. sulabhaa was the daughter of r ri pradhaana in the sacrifices of her ancestors indra used to come with drona, etc. no suitable husband could be obtained for her therefore, she wandered over the earth alone, observant of the practices of asceticism. sulabhaa dwelt this one night in his person like a mendicant in an empty house .
sulocana1, a son of dhritaraashtra .
sumahaabala, an ancient king .
sumaala, pl a people .
sumallika, pl a people .
sumana, a gandharva .
sumanaa, a kaikeyi .
sumanas1, a king.
sumanas2, an ancient king .
sumanas3, an asura .
sumandala, a king .
sumangalaa, a maatri. u, .
sumani, a companion of skanda. u, .
sumanomukha, a serpent .
sumantu, a rishi, disciple of vyaasa . b, .
sumanyu1, a devagandharva .
sumanyu2, v. bhumanyu.
sumati1, an asura .
sumati2, a rishi .
sumidha, a prince .
sumitra1, an ancient king .
sumitra2, one or more kings at the time of yudhishthira .
sumitra3, a muni .
sumitra4, a god .
sumitra5, the charioteer of abhimanyu . sutaja.
sumitra6, a haihaya king .
sumitraa, wife of dasharatha .
sumukha1, a serpent .
sumukha2, one or more suparnas, sons of garuda . b the bird s the son of suparna beholding that all the birds on meru were of golden plumage, resolved to leave that mountain as there was no difference there between good, middling, and bad birds, .
sumukha3, a rishi .
sumukha4, son of dhritaraashtra .
sumukhi, an apsaras. b, .
sunaabha1, a son of dhritaraashtra .
sunaabha2, a counsellor of varuna .
sunaabha3, a mountain .
sunakshatraa, a maatri. u, .
sunaaman1, son of suketu .
sunaaman2, brother of kamsa .
sunaaman3, a suparna, son of garuda.
sunaaman4, a warrior of skanda. u, .
sunandaa, wife of sarvabhauma .
sunandaa, daughter of sarvasena, wife of bharata .
sunandaa, wife of pratipa . shaibyaa.
sunandaa, sister of the cedi king subaahu .
sunasaa, a river .
sunaya, pl a people .
sunda1, an asura, brother of upasunda . asura, daitya, daityendra .
sundaravamsha, pl a people .
sundarikaahrada, a tirtha. i, . next.
sundarikaatirtha, name of a tirtha .
. . naarada related in days of yore the daitya nikumbha of the race of hiranyakashipu had two sons, sunda and upasunda, who always shared with each other happiness as well as woe, and never went anywhere unless together. desirous of subjugating the three worlds, they practised terrible penances on the mountain vindhya, which, by the power of their austerities at last began to emit vapour. in vain the gods repeatedly tempted them by means of every precious possession and beautiful girls, and by illusion, causing their sisters, mothers, wives, etc to appear pursued by a raakshasa and imploring their help. when brahmaan granted them a boon, they asked to become immortal, which he refused, granting them instead that they should not need to be afraid of anything except each other, etc. they now desisted from their asceticism and returned to their abode, where they lived happy, causing even the moon to rise over their city every night, even out of season . they set out to conquer the three worlds in the night under the constellation of maghaa, with a large daitya force cased in mail, etc. the gods sought refuge in brahmaloka, and the daityas subjugated indraloka, and van quished the tribes of the yakshas and rakshases, and the khecaras, and the naagas in the earth, and the tribes of the mlecchas dwelling in the ocean. in order to extinguish the sacrifices that strengthened the gods, they slew those that were performing sacrifices and the assistant brahmans, etc. then they took up their abode in kurukshetra . the devarshis and siddhas and rishis were affected with great grief, and went to the abode of pitaamaha, seated with the gods, the siddhas, and the brahmarshis, mahaadeva, agni, vaayu, the sun and moon, shakra, the paarameshthya rishis, the vaikhaanasas, the vaalakhilyas, the vaanaprasthas, the maricipas, the ajas, the avimudhas, etc. brahmaan sent tilottamaa to them . she came to sunda and upasunda as they were sporting in the vindhya mountains, and from jealousy they struck each other to death with their maces. and pitaamaha then came there with the gods and the great rishis, and granted to tilottamaa that she should roam in the region of the aadityas. then, bestowing the three worlds on indra as before, he returned to his own region.
sunetra1, a prince .
sunetra2, a suparna, son of garuda .
sunitha1, name of a mantra .
sunitha3, an ancient rishi .
sunitha4, name of two ancient kings .
sunitha5, son of krishna and jaambavati .
sunithaa, daughter of mrityu .
supaarshva1, one or more kings at the time of yudhishthira .
supaarshva2, son of dhritaraashtra .
suparna2, name of two devagandharvas .
suparna3, an asura .
suparna5, name of a yajus .
suparna6, a rishi. b, rishilearnt the religion from naaraayana himself, and recited it thrice a hence it was named trisauparna
suparna8, name of a vyuha . garuda2.
suparna, pl birds of garudas race garuda, pl.
suparni, said of svaahaa, .
suprabhaa, a river, one of the seven sarasvatis. i, .
suprabhaa, a maatri. u, .
suprabhaa, daughter of vadaanya. b, .
suprajaa, wife of the fire bhaanu .
suprasaada1, a warrior of skanda. u, .
suprasaadaa, a maatri .
supratardana, an ancient king .
supratika1, an ancient king .
supratika2, the elephant of bhagadatta .
supratika3, a rishi, brother of vibhaavasu. b when the rishi s. wished to separate from his elder brother vibhaavasu and make a partition of their patrimony he was cursed by vibhaavasu, who said thou shalt become an elephant, and he himself cursed vibhaavasu, saying thou shalt become a tortoise. in these forms they continued their hostilities in a lake the elephant being yojanas in height and in circumference, and the tortoise and respectively, .
supratika4, one of the elephants of the quarters . c, .
supratima, an ancient king .
supratishthaa, a maatr. u, .
supravriddha, one of the standard bearers of jayadratha .
suprayogaa, a river .
supriyaa, an apsaras .
supundraka, v. pundraka.
supunyaa, v. punyaa.
sura, mostly pl. . sura shatru, etc.
sura, pl v. shura8.
suraa, a goddess .
surabhi or surabhi, the celestial cow, mother of kine . b, . g, . b, . b, . daakshaayani. do. pl .
surabhimat, name of a fire .
surabhipattana, a city .
surashatru, pl. = asura, pl . do. sg .
suraadevi, v. suraa.
suradvish, pl. = asura, pl . do. sg .
surajaa, an apsaras .
surakrit, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
suramat, name of a fire .
suraamukha, a serpent .
suraanaam hantri, a god .
= indra, .
surapravira, a god .
suraari, a king .
suraari, pl. = asura, pl . do sg .
surarshi, pl. = devarshi, pl . do. sg. = naarada, bis, .
surasa, a serpent .
surasaa, the mother of the serpents .
surasaa, an apsaras .
surasena, pl v. shurasena.
suraashtra, pl a people .
suraashtraka, pl. = suraashtra, pl .
suraasura, adj . devaasura.
surataa, an apsaras .
suratha1, a prince .
suratha2, an ancient king .
suratha3, the father of kotikaasya .
suratha4, a trigarta king, follower of jayadratha .
suratha5, a kuru warrior .
suratha6, a son of drupada .
suratha7, a paancaala prince .
suratha8, son of jayadratha .
surathaakaara, a varsha in kushadvipa .
suraava, name of a horse .
suravarcas, a god .
suravidvish, pl. = asura, pl .
suresha7, a vishvadeva .
suresha8, v. suvesha.
sureshvara7, a rudra .
surenu, a river, one of the seven sarasvatis. i, .
suretara, pl. = asura, pl .
surocanaa, a maatri. u, .
suroman, a serpent .
suruc, a suparna, son of garuda .
surupaa, name of a cow .
suryas names . the names are the following ashvattha, aadidevo dite suta, aindhana, aja, alolupa, amsha, ananta, angaaraka, aapa, aravindaaksha, arihan, arka, aryaman, bhaga, bhaanu, bhutaadi, bhutapati, bhutaashraya, brahmaan, brihaspati, budha, caraacaraatman, shaashvata, shanaishcara, shauri, shaya, shighraga, shuci, shukra, dehakartri, dhanvantari, dharmadhvaja, dhaatri, dhuma ketu, diptaamshu, dvaadashaatman, dvaapara, gabhastimat, indra, jaatharo gni, jaya, jimuta, jivana, kalaa, kaala, kaalacakro vibhaavasu, kaalaadhyaksha, kali sarvamalaashraya, kaamada, kapila, karunaanvita, kaashthaa, kha, krita, kshapaa, kshana, maitreya, mana suparna, mokshadvaaram trivishtapa, mrityu, muhurtaa, paraayana, pitaa, mataa, pitaa maha, prabhaakara, prashaantaatman, prajaa dhyaksha, praanadhaarana, prithivi, purusha, pushan, ravi, rudra, saagara, sanaatana, samvartako vahni, samvatsarakaro shvattha, sarvadhaatunishecitri, sarvalokana maskrita, sarvasyaadi, sarvatomukha, savitri, skanda, soma, srashtri, sukshmaatman, surya, svargadvaaram prajaadvaaram, tamonuda, tejas, tejasaam pati, tretaa, tvashtri, vaidyuto gni, varada, varuna, vaayu, vedakartri, vedaanga, vedavaahana, vishaala, vishvakarman, vishvaatman, vishvatomukha, vishnu, vivasvat, vyaktaavyakta, yama, yaama, yogin, .
surya2, an asura . asura.
suryabhaasa, a kuru warrior .
suryashri, a vishvadeva .
suryadatta, a follower of viraata .
suryadhvaja, a prince .
suryaaksha, a king .
suryaloka . b, . .
suryanetra, a suparna, son of garuda .
suryaputra5, = yama, .
suryasaavitra, a vishvadeva .
suryatirtha, a tirtha .
suryavarcas, a devagandharva .
suryavarman, a trigarta king .
susaaman, a brahman .
susankula, a king .
sushena1, a serpent .
sushena2, a son of dhritaraashtra . sushena7.
sushena3, son of the elder parikshit .
sushena4, a prince .
sushena5, son of jamadagni .
sushena6, a monkey .
sushena7, various kuru warriors .
sushena8, son of karna . karnaputra, karnaatmaja.
susthala, pl a people .
susvara, a suparna, son of garuda .
suta1, the ancestor of the sutas .
suta2, a rishi .
suta3, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
suta, mostly pl name of a caste, . do. pl. = kicaka, pl .
sutaja, said of various charioteers, . do said of the praatikaamin, . suta, pl.
sutanjaya, a kuru warrior . shatrunjaya.
sutanu, daughter of aahuka .
sutaputra6, said of various charioteers, . do. = the praatikaamin, .
sutaputra, pl. = kicaka pl . do. = the brothers of karna, .
sutasoma, son of bhimasena and draupadi . draupadeya, sg. and pl.
sutejana, a paandava warrior .
suti, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
sutirthaka, a tirtha .
sutunga, a mountain .
suvaac1, v. sadasuvaac.
suvaac2, a brahman .
suvaaha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
suvaahu, v. subaahu.
suvaktra1, a warrior of skanda. u, .
suvaamaa, a river .
suvarcalaa, the wife of surya . b, .
suvarcas1, son of dhritaraashtra.
suvarcas2, a prince .
suvarcas3, a brahman .
suvarcas4, a suparna, son of garuda .
suvarcas5, a paandava warrior .
suvarcas6, a kuru warrior .
suvarcas7, a companion of skanda. u, .
suvarman1, son of dhritaraashtra .
suvarman2, a kuru warrior .
suvarna1, a devagandharva . suparna2.
suvarna2, a rishi .
suvarnaa, daughter of ikshvaaku . aikshvaaki.
suvarnaabha, son of shankhapada. b, dishaam paalam
suvarnacuda, a suparna, son of garuda .
suvarnashiras, a rishi.
suvarnaakhya1, a tirtha . do name of a locality .
suvarnashthivin, son of srinjaya . b, . kaancanashthivin, svarnashthivin.
. b parvata, after having taken counsel with naarada, granted a boon to srinjaya in the form of a son, but indra would not let him be long lived, and parvata would not destine otherwise from partiality to indra, but naarada told srinjaya to think of him. naarada and parvata left srinjayas presence. indra slew suvarnashthivin, causing his vajra to assume the form of a tiger, on the shores of the bhaagirathi. srinjaya, in his distress, thought of naarada, who recited to him the shodasharaajop and brought the child back to life, with indras permission suvarnashthivin ruled for years, gratifying . and p and procreated many sons ere he died .
suvarnavarman, a kaashi king .
. b . vasishtha told to raama jaamadagnya after the wedding of rudra and devi on himavat, all the gods, fearing that rudras offspring would consume the worlds, prevailed upon him to withdraw his vital seed umaa cursed the gods, saying that they should become sonless but agni was not present. a small quantity of rudras seed, however, leaped into fire and began to develop mean while, the gods, with indra, were scorched by as. taaraka aa r m a and saa. all became afflicted all the regions of the deities, etc and the retreats of ri. were snatched away by as. . and ri. repaired to brahmaan, who had granted taaraka the boon that he should not be killed by as or raa and umaa had cursed . brahmaan said that agni was not there therefore his offspring, transcending daa raa even g n and birds, will with his dart destroy taaraka kaama is eternal, and in order to slay the enemies of the gods agni will throw rudras seed into the gangaa. the gods failed to find out agni a frog, having been scorched by the energy of agni, appeared on the surface of the water, and said to the gods that agni was now under the water agni, leaving the spot, cursed the frogs, saying that they should be without taste the gods granted them boons . an elephant revealed to the gods that agni was now residing within a certain ashvattha tree agni, entering the heart of the shami tree, cursed all the elephants, saying that their tongues should be bent back the gods granted that they should be able to eat everything and utter indistinct cries. agni was then revealed by a parrot, and cursed the parrots, saying that they should be deprived of the power of speech the gods granted them to speak the letter k, and made shami wood a sacred resting place of fire. the waters in the nethermost regions had come into contact with agni, and those heated waters are vomited forth by the mountain springs. the gods asked agni to rescue prajaapatis, and ri. from taaraka by begetting a heroic son. agni united himself spiritually with gangaa an asura uttered a frightful roar gangaa became agitated and unable to bear the seed, and threw it off on meru the fลtus had the complexion of gold, etc. therefore ri. and . called agni by the name of hiranyaretas, and the earth vasumati . that fลtus, having fallen in a thicket of reeds, assumed a wonderful form the krittikaa reared it as their son, whence it came to be called kaarttikeya he was also called skanda and guha . it was in this way that gold came into existence as the offspring of agni, and hence gold was called jaatarupa gold is truly the illustrious agni, the lord of all things, and the foremost of all prajaapatis the most sacred of all sacred things is gold it has for its essence agni and soma. vasishtha continued this tale was also heard by me in days of yore about brahmaan paramaatman in days of yore, rudra, who is brahmaan, etc having assumed the form of varuna, performed a sacrifice, to which came the munis and all the deities with agni, etc. . shiva then himself poured libations into his own self. at the sight of the celestial damsels the seed of brahmaan fell upon the earth pushan took it up, and it was taken with the sacrificial ladle and poured as an oblation into the fire thence brahmaan caused the orders of beings to spring into existence further bhrigu, etc. for this reason agni is said to be all the deities. bhrigu was reckoned the offspring of varuna, angiras that of agni, kavi that of brahmaan bhrigu, angiras, and kavi were all of them prajaanaam pataya their offspring are called vaarunaa, and kavi and bhrigu vaarunau. agni is brahmaan, pashupati, etc. gold is the offspring of agni when fire is not obtainable gold is used as a substitute, oh jaamadagnya by one who is conversant with the vedic authorities, etc. agni sprang from brahmaan, and from agni sprang gold those persons observant of righteousness who make gifts of gold are regarded as giving away all the deities, etc. he who makes a gift of gold at the second twilight succeeds in attaining to residence with brahmaan, vaayu, agni, and soma, and to the regions of indra, etc. he has never to fall n from the regions to which he attains . after a long time kaarttikeya grew up, and was chosen as generalissimo by all the gods with indra he slew dai. taaraka and many other asuras. bhishma continued thus addressed by vasishtha jaama dagnya made gifts of gold to the brahmans and became cleansed of his sins .
suvaastu, a river .
suvaastuka, a prince .
suvesha, a god .
suvenaa, a river .
suvishaalaa, a maatri. u, .
suvira, pl a people . sauvira pl.
suvira1, a prince .
suvira3, a prince. b, .
suvrata1, name of two warriors of skanda. u, .
suyashaa, a princess .
suyajnaa, a princess, daughter of prasenajit .
suyajus, son of bhumanyu .
suyaama, pl a class of gods .
svadhaa, the food offered to the pitris, . different deities identified with the s. shiva, shri, durgaa, krishna, skanda, . do a ritual exclamation, .
svadhaavat pl a class of pitris .
svaadukaara, name of a caste, .
svaahaa, personified as a daughter of daksha, wife of agni . u, . b, . different deities identified with the s. shiva, shri, krishna, sarasvati, skanda, .
svaahaakaara1, the exclamation svaahaa, . do. = durgaa, .
svaksha, pl a people .
svana, name of a fire .
svar1, mostly occurring in compounds, e.g. gamana, gata, gati, netri, nivaasa, yaata . do. = shiva . do. = vishnu .
svaraashtra, a people .
svarbhaanavi, wife of aayus .
svarbhaanu, an aasura, commonly the demon who causes eclipses . d, . b, . b, . m, . asura, raahu. do. = shiva .
svarga, etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc passim.
svargadvaara1, name of a tirtha .
svargamaarga, a tirtha. z, .
svargaarohanika parva, the nd of the minor parvans of mhbhr . . vaishampaayana said when yudhishthira had taken leave of the citizens, etc he comforted the wis, whose husbands had been slain, with abundant gifts, and being duly installed on the throne, he reassured all his subjects, etc. after fifty days, seeing that the sun had begun its northern course, he set out to see bhishma, taking with him what was necessary for the latters cremation, accompanied by dhritaraashtra, gaandhaari, kunti, his brothers, krishna, vidura, yuyutsu, yuyudhaana, and his other relatives and a great retinue, and his priests. he beheld bhishma surrounded by ri vyaasa, naarada, asita devala, and by the remnant of unslain kings from various parts of the country, guarded by the warriors appointed for that duty all the inhabitants of kurujaangala were also there. when yudhishthira had told his errand, bhishma opened his eyes and saw all the bharatas assembled. he seized the hand of yudhishthira and welcomed him he had now been lying there for fifty eight nights, which he had felt to be as long as a century now it was the bright fort night of maagha, and of this one fourth had passed away. then he reminded dhritaraashtra of the instructions he had received from vyaasa, and that he should regard the paandavas and especially yudhishthira as his own sons. then he praised krishna as the supreme god, and asked him to grant him leave to die, and that he should ever protect the paandavas he complained that duryodhana had never been willing to follow his counsels he said that he knew from naarada and vyaasa, that krishna and arjuna were ri naaraayana and nara, who had lived for a long time in badari. krishna then gave bhishma leave to die and come to the vasus, comparing him to maarkandeya. having given some few admonitions to dhritaraashtra, etc bhishma successively caused his life breaths to leave his body, and the parts of his body became successively free from wounds and arrows, at which the bystanders became filled with wonder. his soul passed through the crown of his head, ascended to heaven like a meteor, and soon became invisible, while the celestial kettle drums began to play, a rain of flowers fell n, and si. and b ri. applauded. then the paandavas, etc. cremated the corpse. then, accompanied by ri etc they pro ceeded to bhaagirathi, where they offered oblations of water to bhishma. then bhaagirathi appeared and, weeping, praised bhishma . krishna comforted her, mentioning the present felicity of bhishma as one of the vasus, and declared that he had not been slain by shikhandin, but by arjuna. gangaa gave up her grief all the kings, headed by krishna, obtained her permission to depart, and all returned .
svargatirtha, name of a tirtha. n, .
svarnagriva, a warrior of skanda. u, .
svarnabindu, a tirtha. c, .
svarupa, an asura .
svastika1, a serpent .
svastika2, a warrior of skanda. u, .
svastimati, a maatri. u, .
svastipura, a tirtha .
svastyaatreya, a rishi .
svaati, name of a nakshatra .
svayambhubhavana . n gautama said where there is no fear of cold or heat, no hunger, thirst, pain, sorrow, joy, no one that is agreeable or disagreeable, no friend and no enemy, no decrepitude and death, neither righteousness nor sin which is free from passion, happy, and where there is wis and sattva...dhritaraashtra said they who are freed from every attachment, possessed of purified souls, steady in their vow, devoted to yoga, who have attained to the happiness of heaven, and consist of sattva, attain to the sacred abode of brahmaan, .
svaayambhuva, adj. relating to svayambhu dharmeshukratusthaanammahaasthaanamvimaanam
svayambhuvo vana. c in the s. v. vishvakarman on the occasion of a sacrifice had given the earth to kashyapa as dakshinaa. angry because she had been given to a mortal the earth sank to rasaatala, but appeased by kashyapa rose again from within the water in the form of an altar . as soon as this altar is touched by a mortal it enters the sea
svayamprabhaa, an apsaras.
. . . the paandavas went to the paancaala land in the company of brahmans, who told them of the svayamvara, and of dhrishta dyumna, and krishnaa . on their way they beheld dvaipaayana. they took up their quarters in the house of a potter, and ating the brahmanical profession, they began to lead a mendicant life. yajnasena always cherished the wish of bestowing his daughter on kiritin, but never spoke of this wish to anybody. he therefore caused a very stiff bow to be made, which was incapable of being bent by anybody except arjuna and causing some machinery to be erected in the sky, he set up a mark attached to that machinery, and said he who with this bow and these arrows hits the mark shall obtain my daughter. among the kings that came were duryodhana and the kurus and karna. the princes entered the arena by the north eastern gate . the arena was situated to the north east of the capital . on the day draupadi, having bathed, entered the arena. then the purohita of the somakas gratified agni. dhrishtadyumna, possessing a voice deep as that of a kettle drum or of the clouds, taking hold of his sisters arm, stood in the midst of the arena, and said hit the mark by means of these five arrows. then he addressed his sister, reciting to her the names, etc. of the assembled princes . . enumeration of the assembled princes . . there came also the devaganas on their chariots the rudras and the aadityas, the vasus and the ashvins, the saadhyas and all the maruts, with yama and dhaneshvara walking ahead and also the daityas and suparnas, the mahoragas, the devarshis, the guhyakas and the caaranas, vishvaavasu, naarada and parvata, the principal gandharvas with the apsarases, and the asuras and siddhas, and halaayudha, and janaardana, and the chiefs of the vrishnis, andhakas, and yadus, always obedient to krishna. krishna pointed out the paandavas to his brother raama. when duryodhana, the cedi king shishupaala, jaraasandha, the madra king shalya, etc. had in vain tried to string the bow, and karna, though having succeeded in stringing it, had, as a suta, been rejected by krishnaa, jishnu came forward . some of the brahmans spoke reproachingly of arjunas daring undertaking, some approved of it . arjuna, bending his head to ishaana and remembering krishna, accom plished the task. the gods showered celestial flowers. drupada was filled with joy. yudhishthira with the twins returned home. krishnaa approached arjuna, who soon after wards left the lists followed by her . . when drupada expressed his desire of bestowing his daughter on that brahman, the kings resolved to slay drupada and burn krishnaa, but spare arjuna, whom they took for a brahman. they rushed at drupada, who was defended by arjuna with the bow and by bhima with a tree torn up by the root. krishna then knew, and said to balaraama that they must be the paandavas, who had escaped from the fire . karna was defeated by arjuna, and the madra king shalya by bhima then duryodhana, etc who had been engaged with the brahmans, desisted from the combat, because brahmans, though offending, should yet always be protected. krishna said to them that those brahmans had justly acquired the maiden. the kings returned to their respective kings. bhima and arjuna, with difficulty, escaped from the throng, followed by krishnaa. . kunti was filled with anxiety, seeing that her sons were late in returning from their begging tour. then, in the late afternoon, jishnu, accompanied by a body of brahmans, entered the abode of the bhaargava . bhima and arjuna presented krishnaa as their alms, and kunti, not yet seeing them, said enjoy ye all. afterwards, she was alarmed at what she had said. yudhishthira declared that arjuna should wed her but arjuna replied that it was a sin for the younger brother to marry before the elder. meanwhile, they all fell in love with krishnaa. then yudhishthira recollected the words of vyaasa, and, from fear of a division amongst the brothers, said that she should be the common wife of them all. krishna and balaraama then paid them a visit, and again went away . when bhima and arjuna were turning towards the abode of the bhaargava, dhrishta dyumna followed them and concealed himself in some part of the house. then bhima and arjuna and the twins returning from their begging tour in the evening, gave everything to yudhishthira. kunti caused krishnaa to distribute it, giving to bhima alone as much as to all the others, because he always ate much. then they laid n for the night, and dhrishta dyumna overheard their conversations. in the morning dhrishtadyumna set out to report it to drupada, who was sad, because he did not know, if perhaps a man of mean descent had taken away his daughter, though he thought it possible that it was arjuna .
svishtakrit, a fire .
syamantaka, a jewel .
syamantapancaka, v. su.
syumarashmi, a rishi .
taadakaayana, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
taditprabhaa, a maatri. u, .
taijasa, name of a tirtha .
takshashilaa, name of a city . b, .
takshaka, name of a serpent king . d, . naaga, naagaraaja, naagendra, pannaga, pannageshvara, pannagendra.
taala, . taaladhvaja, taalaketu.
taalacara, pl a people . taalajangha pl.
taalajangha . b, . g, .
taalajangha, pl a people .
taalaakata, name of a city .
taalaketu1, a prince. b, .
taalavana, pl a people .
tamas1, a brahman. b, .
tamasaa, a river .
tamasi, a river .
tamontakrit, a warrior of skanda. u, .
taamraa, wife of kashyapa .
taamraa, a river .
taamracuda, a companion of skanda. u, .
taamracudaa, a maatri. u, .
taamraahvaya, name of a dvipa .
taamralipta, pl a people . next.
taamraliptaka, pl a people .
taamraparni, a tirtha . do a mountain .
taamraaruna, a tirtha . next.
taamraarunaa, a river . the prec.
taamraushtha, a yaksha .
taamravati, a river .
tamsu, an ancient king .
tanabaala, pl a people .
tanaya, pl a people .
tandi, a rishi . brahmayoni.
tandulikaashrama, a tirtha .
taandya, one or more rishis . c, .
tangana, pl a people .
tantipaala, the name which sahadeva assumed in the palace of viraata .
tantripaala v. tantipaala.
tanu, a rishi . devarshi.
tapana2, a naaga .
tapana3, a paancaala warrior .
tapa, name of several fires .
taapasaaranya, a tirtha .
tapati, daughter of surya and wife of samvarana . sauri, saavitryavarajaa, vaivasvati.
taapatya, pl. .
taapatya, sg. = arjuna, .
taapatya, adj. .
. . arjuna asked why he had called him taapatya, and citraratha said surya had a lovely daughter tapati, the younger sister of saavitri. rikshas son, the king samvarana, duly worshipped surya to him surya resolved to bestow his daughter. once, when samvarana went on a hunting expedition, his steed died from fatigue on the mountain, and he began to wander on foot and saw tapati alone, and declared her his love. she did not speak a word, but disappeared. he wandered through the whole forest in search of her, and failing to find her, indulged in lamentations . he fell n on the earth. then she appeared again. he asked her to marry him according to the gaandharva form of marriage. she said that she loved him, but told him to ask her father aaditya for her hand, with worship, ascetic penances, and vows . tapati then ascended to the skies, and samvarana again fell n on the earth. at last his followers found him, and his minister raised him up and sprinkled his head with water, etc. regaining his consciousness, samvarana sent away all his attendants with the exception of his minister alone, and then began to worship surya. he also thought of his purohita, the rishi vasishtha. after the king had stayed thus on the same spot day and night, the viprarshi vasishtha came there on the day. vasishtha knew at once, by his ascetic power, what had happened and ascended to the sky in order to see surya, and asked him to give tapati to samvarana. samvarana, with due rites, took tapatis hand on that mountain resorted to by the gods and the gandharvas. and the king caused vasishtha to be proclaimed his regent in his capital and king, etc and sported with his wife in the woods on that mountain for twelve years. now indra for twelve years poured no rain in his capital and king. then vasishtha brought samvarana and his wife back into the city, and then indra poured rain in abundance. samvarana, with tapati, performed sacrifices for twelve years. their son was kuru, the ancestor of arjuna .
tapodaana, a tirtha .
taara1, name of a monkey .
taaraa, wife of the monkey vaalin .
taaraa, wife of brihaspati .
taaraka1, an asura . u, . b, . b, . asura, daiteya, daitya, daityasattama, daityendra, daanava.
taaraka, pl the sons of taaraka1 .
taarakaaksha, an asura. d, . taaraaksha.
taarakaamaya1, adj. . b, .
taarakavadhopaakhyaana . b . and ri reduced to great distress, urged the six krittikaa to rear that child . amongst the celestial ladies there were none, save these, that could bear the seed of agni in their wombs. agni became gratified. his energy was divided into six portions, and a portion was placed in each of the krittikaas. all of them were delivered at the same time, and the six portions united into one. the earth received the child from a heap of gold. he grew up in a celestial forest of reeds, reared by the krittikaas . the thirty three gods, etc. came to see him ri. praised him, g. sang in honour of kumaara, with six faces, etc. . the gods gave him various kinds of toys, etc. . raa. and as. began to walk in the train of skanda. taaraka in vain sought, by various means, to slay him. the gods made him the commander of their forces, and when he had grown up he slew taaraka with his irresistible dart as in sport, and re established indra in the sovereignty. skanda became the protector of the gods and did what was agreeable to shankara . gold is the powerful energy of agni and was born with kaarttikeya hence gold is highly auspicious. thus did vasishtha relate to raama in days of old. by making gifts of gold raama became purified of all his sins, and attained to a high place in heaven that is not easily attainable by men .
tarala, pl a people .
taaraamriga . mrigashiras.
tarandaka, v. arantuka.
tarantuka, name of a dvaarapaala and a tirtha belonging to him . kk, .
taarkshya, pl a people .
taarkshyakapidhvaja, dual, .
taruna, name of a gandharva .
tarunaka, a serpent .
tejasvin1, name of one of the five indras .
tejeyu, son of raudraashva .
tena, pl v. stena, pl.
tilabhaara, pl a people .
tilottamaa, name of an apsaras . b brahmaan caused vishvakarman to make a celestial maiden from small portions of every kind of gem, whence she was called tilottmaa . brahmaan was sitting with his face turned eastwards and the rishis facing all directions. as t. was walking round them, there appeared three other faces on the body of mahaadeva and eyes on indra, while all the other celestials, only excepting pitaamaha, and the rishis gazed at her, . b, .
timingila, a king .
tiragraha, pl a people .
tirtha, pl. . u, .
tirthamahaahrada, name of a tirtha .
tirthaseni, a maatri. u, .
. draupadi, bhimasena, nakula, and sahadeva lamented arjuna sahadeva suggested to move from the kaamyaka wood . then came the devarshi naarada who, at the request of yudhishthira, told them what the brahmarshi pulastya had formerly said to bhishma about the merits of circumambulating the earth for the purpose of visiting the tirthas, when bhishma was engaged in a pitrya vrata at gangaadvaara in the company of munis, and made oblations to the pitris, gods, and rishis . at bhishmas request pulastya explained the qualities of a person who will acquire merit by visiting tirthas he said that the costly sacrifices, which only kings and very rich men are capable of affording, are not of greater merit than a sojourn in tirthas, which even the poorest may accom plish. then he first described pushkara . then he enumerated a great many of tirthas and the merit of visiting them. vadavaa . pulastyas enumeration of tirthas continued . kurukshetra . the enumeration con tinued. raamahradaa . the enumera tion continued. mankanaka . the enumeration continued. prthudaka . the enumeration continued. kurukshetra . the enumeration continued . tungaka . the enumeration continued. prayaaga . the enumeration continued. gangaa is equal to kurukshetra, wherever one may bathe in it, especially in kanakhala and in prayaaga, which is the most excellent a bath in the gangaa in that place removes sins. in the kritayuga all the tirthas were sacred, in the tretaayuga pushkara alone, in the dvaapara kurukshetra, in the kaliyuga gangaa. in pushkara one should practise austerities, in mahaalaya one should make gifts, on the malaya one should ascend the funeral pyre, in bhrigutunga one should kill oneself by fasting bathing in pushkara, kurukshetra, the gangaa, and magadha one purifies seven generations of ones race upwards and nwards, etc. as long as ones bones lie in contact with the water of the gangaa, so long s one live, honoured in heaven . pitaamaha has said that no tirtha is equal to the gangaa, no god to keshava, and none is superior to brahmans. this truthful description one should recite only to the twice born, etc. . in these tirthas have bathed the vasus, the saadhyas, the aadityas, the maruts, the ashvins, and the rishis, who are equal to the gods. only men of piety and learning are able to visit these tirthas on account of their purified senses, their belief in god, and their acquaintance with the vedas . naarada continued then pulastya disappeared, and bhishma, at the command of pulastya, wandered over the earth and ended his tirthayaatraa at prayaaga. the man that so walks about the earth is rewarded after death as much as for horse sacrifices. so wilt thou yudhishthira obtain the eight fold dharma, as bhishma did before, and because thou wilt lead the rishis, thy merit will be eight fold those tirthas are infested by raakshasas, and no king, save thyself, has gone there . the foremost of rishis are always there and expect thee vaalmiki, kashyapa, aatreya, kundajathara, vishvaamitra, gautama, asita devala, maarkandeya, gaalava, bharadvaaja, vasishtha, uddaalaka, shaunaka with his son, vyaasa, durvaasas, and jaabaali. with them thou visit these tirthas. the great rishi lomasha will come to thee, thou follow him and me to these tirthas. then naarada disappeared and yudhishthira spoke to the ascetics of the tirthas . dhaumya tirthaka thana . while dhaumya was speaking thus, lomasha arrived and told that arjuna had obtained brahma shiras, learnt the gaandharva veda, etc. . lomasha said that arjuna had asked him to cause yudhishthira to visit all tirthas, like manu and other raajarshis, and protect him from the raakshasas as dadhica had protected indra and angiras had protected the sun. lomasha had twice before visited the tirthas. at the command of lomasha, yudhishthira caused the citizens, brahmans, and yatis, who were not able to endure the privations of the journey, to return to haasti napura, where dhritaraashtra gave them their proper allow ances from affection for yudhishthira, and yudhishthira, with only a small number of brahmans abode for three nights at kaamyaka cheered by lomasha . the brahmans, who dwelt in the wood, prevailed upon yudhishthira that he allowed them to partake of the tirthayaatraa. just when they were about to start, vyaasa, parvata, and naarada came to kaamyaka, and caused them not only to fulfil human vows by purifying the body, but even divine vows by purifying the heart, that it might be free from evil thoughts and harbour only friendly feelings towards everybody. when those celestial and human rishis had performed the usual propitiatory ceremonies, and when they had worshipped the feet of lomasha, dvaipaayana, naarada, and the devarshi parvata, the paandavas and krishnaa started towards the east with dhaumya and the ascetics on the day following maargashirshi, when pushya was in ascendance, dressed in bark and hides, with matted locks, cased in mail, and armed with swords, etc with indrasena and other attendants with some fourteen chariots and a number of cooks . as yudhi shthira asked why he who is virtuous is unhappy, and his enemies who are sinful, happy, lomasha said that sinful men often prosper in consequence of their sins, but at last they are overtaken by destruction, even as in the devayuga the daiteyas and daanavas, who practised vice and did not visit the tirthas, for a time prospered by their sin and vanquished the gods, who practised virtue and visited the tirthas at last, when the good qualities, prosperity, etc left the asuras and went to the gods, while bad qualities, adversity, etc came to the asuras, and kali possessed them, they were overtaken by destruction. nriga, shibi aushinara, bhagiratha, vasumanas, gaya, puru, and pururavas had by practising ascetic penances and visiting tirthas, etc obtained fame and wealth, etc and so would yudhishthira, and as ikshvaaku with his sons, etc and mucukunda, maandhaatri, and marutta, and the gods and devarshis obtained fame by the power of asceticism, so would yudhishthira, while the dhaartaraashtras, enslaved by sinfulness and ignorance, soon would be exterminated . the paandavas with their followers, proceeding from place to place, at last arrived at naimisha, and thence to the gomati, etc. . brahmasaras . gaya . thence they came to the hermitage of agastya, and dwelt in durjayaa there asked by yudhishthira lomasha told agastyopaakhyaana . descrip tion of the gangaa . then, having at the suggestion of lomasha, with his brothers and krishnaa, bathed in bhrigos tirtham and gratified the gods and pitris, yudhishthira blazed forth in brighter effulgence and became invincible. at his request lomasha told jaamadagnyatejohaanikathana . yudhishthira wished to hear the details of agastya. lomasha related agastyopaakhyaana . at the request of yudhishthira lomasha related how agastya had caused vindhya to cease to increase, how agastya drank up the ocean, sagara, asamanjas, gangaavatarana . then yudhishthira pro ceeded to the rivers nandaa and aparanandaa and the hemakuta mountain. having, at the command of lomasha, bathed in nandaa, they proceeded to the river kaushiki with the hermitages of vishvaamitra and of kaashyapa, the father of rishyashringa . at the request of yudhi shthira lomasha told the history of rishyashringa starting from kaushiki, yudhishthira in succession repaired to all the sacred shrines and came to the sea where the gangaa falls into it, and bathed in the centre of rivers. then they proceeded by the shore of the sea towards the kalinga country. lomasha said here is the river vaitarani . when they had all bathed in the vaitarani, yudhishthira felt as if he were carried off from the region of men, and beheld all worlds, and heard the reciting of vaikhaanasas, whom lomasha declared to be at the distance of, yojanas. lomasha ordered him to be silent, as this was the divine forest of svayambhu taught by lomasha the words to be recited yudhishthira mounted the altar of kashyapa and bathed in the sea then he went to the mahendra mountain and spent the night there . lomasha told yudhishthira the names of the ascetics, and he, with his brothers, paid a visit to them. akritavrana, a follower of raama jaamadagnya, told him when parashu raama appeared, and that the following day was the th. at the request of yudhishthira, akritavrana related the story of arjuna kaartavirya, and jamadagni, and parashuraama mahendraacala gamana . on their journey to the tirthas they bathed in a holy stream, and thence reached to godaavari and to the sea then to agastyatirtha and the naari tirthas, where they heard of and praised the deed of arjuna, and gave away thousands of cows, and by and by they reached shurpaaraka, where they saw the altar of ricikas son surrounded by crowds of ascetics, and the shrines of the vasus, of the hosts of the maruts, of the ashvins, vaivasvata, aaditya, dhaneshvara, indra, vishnu, savitri, bhava, candra, divaakara, and of the lord of waters, and of the host of saadhyas, of dhaatri, of the pitris, of rudra with his host, of sarasvati, of the host of siddhas, etc and then returned to shurpaaraka, and from this tirtha at the sea they came to prabhaasa, where they offered libations to the pitris and gods, and where yudhishthira practised austerities for twelve days, subsisting upon air and water, and performing ablutions day and night, surrounded by fires kindled on all sides. there came to them balaraama, krishna, shaamba, etc kaarshni, the grandson of shini, and other vrishnis, and heard what had happened to them, and wept when they saw the paandavas so exceedingly lean . bala raama . saatyaki, citing shaibya, etc who did the work for yayaati, recommended that raama, krishna, pradyumna, shaamba, himself, aniruddha, gada, ulmuka, baahuka, bhaanu, nitha, the young hero nishatha, saarana, and caarudeshna should lead the united army of the vrishnis, bhojas, andhakas, saattvatas, and shuras against the dhaarta raashtras and kill them in battle, and that abhimanyu should rule the earth until yudhishthira had fulfilled his vow. krishna said that the paandavas would never accept the sovereignty unless it were won by their own prowess, and yudhishthira assented to the words of krishna, saying, that as krishna alone knew him, so he alone knew krishna, who would perceive when the time had come for bravery, and he and saatyaki would then defeat suyodhana. then the yadus returned home, and the paandavas continued their journey accompanied by lomasha, and came to the river payoshni . lomasha spoke of sacrifices that had formerly been performed at the payoshni he who bathed in the payoshni would obtain the same lokas as gaya. having bathed in the payoshni they went to vaiduryaparvata and narmadaa, where they, according to the exposition of lomasha, visited all the tirthas and shrines, giving gifts to the brahmans by thousands. lomasha said that this was the junction between the tretaa and dvaapara age, where a person is freed of all his sins, and that here was performed the sacrifice of sharyaati, yudhishthira wished to hear more about it . sukanyopaakhyaana . lomasha recommended to yudhishthira to visit the above named lake, and sikataaksha, and the saindhava wood, and pushkara, and aarcikaparvata . here the rishis eat rice boiled in milk. here is the yamunaa, where krishna performed austerities there is the holy spring of indra, where dhaatri, vidhaatri, and varuna rose upwards. in the yamunaa maandhaatri and somaka saahadevi performed sacrifices . maandhaatrupaa khyaana . jantupaakhyaana . plakshaavatarana gamana . shyenakapotiya . when they arrived at the hermitage of shvetaketu
tittibha, an asura .
tittira, pl a people .
tittiri1, a certain breed of horses, .
tittiri2, a serpent .
tittiri3, a brahman, brother of vaishampaayana . c, .
tomara, pl a people .
toranasphaatikaa, name of a sabhaa .
traibali, a muni .
traishirsha, adj. .
traigarta2, adj. .
traigartaka, adj. .
traipura, pl a people .
traividya, trayi. do adj .
traiyambaka, adj. .
trasadasyu, an ancient king . paurukutsa.
tretaa, name of the second yuga . in the t. sacrifices are introduced, religion decreases by a fourth, naaraayana is red, etc . b, . b, . tretaayuga.
tretaayuga, the second yuga . c, . b, . e, . tretaa.
trishanku1, an ancient king . matanga.
trishringa, a mountain .
trishulakhaata, name of a tirtha .
trishulapaane sthaana, a tirtha .
tridasha, pl . do. sg. = shiva .
tridasha, sg .
tridashadvish, pl. = asura, pl .
tridashaari, pl. = asura, pl .
tridasharshi, pl. = devarshi, pl .
tridivaa, a river .
tridivesha, pl .
triganga, name of a tirtha . g, .
trigarta1, an ancient king .
trigarta, pl a people, especially five brothers, trigarta princes . e, . traigarta, pl. traigartaka.
trigartaraajan1, v. trigartaraaja.
trijataa, a raakshasi . raakshasi.
trikuta1, a mountain .
trikuta2, a mountain near lankaa . d, .
trikutavat, a mountain. g, . trikuta.
trinaaciketa, . do. = mahaapurusha .
tripaada, a daitya. u, .
tripishtapa1, . trivishtapa.
tripishtapa2, a tirtha .
tripura, the triple city of the asuras . c, . d . the asuras had three cities in heaven one of iron, one of silver, and one of gold indra could not vanquish them the gods repaired to rudra and promised him the creatures slain in every sacrifice. shiva then made gandha maadana and vindhya the two bamboo poles of his chariot, the earth his chariot, shesha the aksha, the moon and sun the two wheels, elaapatra and pushpadanta the two pins of the yoke, the malaya mountain the yoke, takshaka the string for tying the yoke to the pole, and the creatures the traces of the steeds, the four vedas his four steeds, the upavedas the bridle bits, gaayatri and saavitri the reins, om the whip, brahmaan the driver, mandara the bow, vaasuki the bowstring, vishnu the shaft, agni the arrow head, vaayu the wings of the shaft, yama vaivasvata the feathers in its tail, lightning the whetting stone, meru the standard. aed by gods and rishis he ated a posture called after his own name, and stood immovable for years. when, however, the three cities came together in the firmament he shot that terrible shaft of three knots, inspired with the yuga fire and composed of vishnu and soma. while the triple city began to burn, paarvati repaired thither to behold the sight she had on her lap a child having a bald head with five tufts of hair on it indra endeavoured to strike the child with the thunderbolt, but mahaadeva paralysed his arm. indra, with the gods, repaired to brahmaan, who, understanding that it was shiva, came with them and recited a hymn . mahaadeva became gratified, and the arm of indra reassumed its natural state, . g, . cf foll.
tripuraa, a city .
tripuravaasin, pl. . d, .
triraava, a suparna, son of garuda .
trisauparna, adj .
trisrotasi, a river .
tristhaana, a tirtha belonging to shiva. f, .
trisuparna, adj .
trisuvarcaka, name of a fire .
trita, a rishi, brother of ekata and dvita . b, . c, . b, .
trivaara v. triraava.
truti, a maatri. u, .
tryaksha, pl .
trinabindu, a rishi .
trinaka, an ancient king .
trinapa, a gandharva .
trinasomaangiras, a rishi .
tritiyaa, a river .
tubha, v. stubha.
tuhara, a warrior of skanda. u, .
tuhaara, a warrior of skanda. u, .
tuhunda1, an asura .
tuhunda2, a son of dhritaraashtra .
tuhunda3, pl a people .
tukhaara, pl v. tushaara, pl.
tulaadhaara, a merchant. b, .
. b . bhishma said there was once a brahman jaajali, living in a forest he proceeded to the sea shore and practised penances for many years. living within the waters he roamed through all the worlds with the speed of mind. once, unseen by ra he thought there is none equal to me psh. said to him that even the celebrated tulaadhaara was not worthy of saying such words. ri. wished to see tulaadhaara ra. raised him from the sea and showed him the road. arrived at vaaraanasi, he met tulaadhaara and spoke to him thus. asked by yudhishthira, bhishma described those difficult feats that jaajali had performed before while he stood as a wooden post rapt in yoga, a pair of kulinga birds built their nest on his head, laid their eggs there, their young ones came out, and only when the latter did not come back, even after a month, jaajali left that spot. then he began to slap his armpits and proclaim loudly have won great merit. then an invisible voice in the sky said thou art not equal to the wise tulaadhaara at vaaraanasi even he is not fit to say what thou sayest. jaajali, filled with wrath and desirous of meeting with tulaadhaara, began to roam over the whole earth, observing the vow of silence and passing the night at that spot where evening overtook him. after a considerable time he reached vaaraanasi and saw tulaadhaara engaged in selling miscellaneous articles . tulaa dhaara stood up and saluted him, mentioning his dealings with the birds, etc. . asked by jaajali, the vaishya tulaadhaara discoursed to him upon the ways of morality in every creature that is endued with the five senses live all the deities, surya, etc. the goat is agni the sheep is varuna the horse is surya earth is viraaj the cow and the calf are soma the man that sells these can never obtain success...in days of yore many ri. rebuked nahusha for having slain a cow and a bull in order to purify nahusha, however, they divided that sin in parts, and converting the fragments into diseases, threw them among all creatures, but declared that they should not be able to pour libations in his sacrifice . jaajali said that tulaadhaaras trines smacked of atheism, which the latter denied, discoursing on sacrifice, saying that brahmans, having given up the sacrifice ordained for them, had betaken themselves to the performance of sacrifices that are for kshatriyas . instead of all animals the rice ball is a worthy offering in sacrifices all rivers are as sacred as the sarasvati, and all mountains are sacred the soul is itself a tirtha not wander about on the earth to visit sacred places . tulaadhaara caused jaajali to summon the birds that had been reared by the latter they made answer agreeably to the religion of ahimsaa . faith is the daughter of surya, etc quoting a verse sung by brahmaan, exalting faith the food of a liberal usurer is acceptable, but not the food of a miser ...want of faith is a high sin faith is a cleanser of sins. after a short while, tulaadhaara and jaajali both ascended to heaven. many truths of this kind were spoken of by tulaadhaara jaajali, having heard his words, betook himself to tranquillity .
tumbuma, pl a people .
tumburu, a gandharva . b, . b, . gandharva.
tunda1, a raakshasa .
tunda2, a prince .
tundikera1, pl a people .
tundikera2, sg. .
tungaka, a sacred forest. . in days of old, when the vedas had been lost, the rishi saarasvata of angiras race seated at ease on the upper garments of the rishis in the forest of t. made the rishis recollect all that they had learned before, only by distinctly pronouncing the syllable om. there the rishis and the gods, varuna, agni, prajaapati, hari naaraayana, mahaadeva, and pitaamaha, appointed bhrigu to officiate at a sacrifice, and bhrigu once more performed the agnyaadhaana for all these rishis, gratifying agni with a portion of clarified butter according to the ordinance. a visit here destroys all sins, and dwelling there for a month with subdued senses, etc leads to the brahmaloka and delivers ones race, .
tungavenaa, a river .
turaga, pl. .
turvasu, son of yayaati and devayaani .
tushaara, pl a people .
tushita, pl a class of gods .
tvashtaadhara, a son of shukra .
tvashtri, name of a god, one of the aadityas . h, . u, . g, . prajaapati, vishvakarma.
tvaashtra, adj. . b, .
tvaashtri . sanjnaa.
uccaishravas1, a celestial horse . u, . ashvaraaja.
uccaishravas2, son of avikshit .
ucchikha, a serpent .
ucchringa, a companion of skanda. u, .
ushanas, v. shukra1.
ushangava, an ancient king .
ushinara, an ancient king . aushinara2.
ushinara3, a vrishni .
ushinara, pl a people .
ushirabija, a mountain .
udakakridana, name of a place .
udaana, one of the vital breaths . b, . b, . g, . j, . b, . g, . do. = shiva .
udapaana, one or more tirthas . b although the sarasvati seems to be lost there, yet, owing to the succu lence of the herbs and the moistness of the land, holy persons know the river . there the great ascetic trita had lived and drunk soma in a pit, where his two brothers had left him, and therefore were cursed by him. requested by janamejaya vaishampaayana related in a former yuga there were three brothers who were ascetics ekata, dvita, and trita, like to prajaapati, having by their tapas won brahmaloka, and being blessed with children. at last their father gautama died, having passed a long life here. those kings who had been his yajamaanas continued to pay respect to his sons. once, thinking of performing a sacrifice and having received animals from their yajamaanas, those maharshis came towards the east. trita was walking in front, ekata and dvita in his rear, bringing up the animals. ekata and dvita thought of taking the kine away and deserting trita. in the night they saw a wolf. trita ran in fright and fell into a deep pit on the bank of the sarasvati. though hearing his wails of woe, his brothers deserted him. trita feared to die because he had not earned the merit of drinking soma, and in imagination performed a sacrifice, himself being the hotri and uttering the rices, yajushes, and saamans . brihaspati prevailed upon the gods to go there lest trita should become angry and create other gods. trita duly gave them their shares with proper mantras they granted him boons that the gods should deliver him, and that he who bathes in that well shall have the end which is attained by persons who have drunk soma. at these words the sarasvati, with her waves, appeared within that well. raised aloft by her, trita emerged and worshipped the gods. meeting his brothers he cursed them, saying that they should become wolves and have for offspring leopards and bears and apes, .
udaapekshin, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
udarashaandilya, a rishi .
udaraaksha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
udaavarta, a king .
udaya, the mountain where the sun rises. . udayaaeala, udayagiri.
udayendu, a city of the kurus .
udbhasa, pl a people .
udbhava1, a prince .
uddaalaka, a rishi . b, . i, .
uddaalaki, a rishi .
uddhava, a vrishni .
udhra, v. udra.
udicya, pl a people .
udra, pl a people . odra.
udrapaaraka, a serpent .
udvaha1, a prince .
udvaha2, name of a wind. j the wind which causes soma and other luminaries to arise, and which sucks up the waters in the oceans and imparts them to the clouds and thereafter to parjanya, is called u .
udyat, a mountain .
udyogaparvan, the fifth book of the mhbhr . udyoga.
ugra1, a son of dhritaraashtra .
ugra2, a prince .
ugra3, a son of kavi. b, .
ugra, name of a caste, .
ugrashravas1, son of lomaharshana and generally named sauti, who recited the mhbhr. to shaunaka . the following synonyms laumaharshani, . lomaharshanaputra, . pauraanika, q.v. sauti, suta, sutaja, sutanandana, sutaputra, q.v.
ugrashravas2, a son of dhritaraashtra .
ugraka, a serpent .
ugrasena1, brother of janamejaya .
ugrasena2, a devagandharva .
ugrasena3, a prince .
ugrasena4, a son of dhritaraashtra .
ugrasena5, son of the elder parikshit .
ugrasena6, king of the vrishnis, father of kamsa . c, . aahuka, bhojaraaja, kukuraadhipa.
ugratejas1, a serpent . do. = shiva .
ugrayaayin, a son of dhritaraashtra .
ugraayudha1, a son of dhritaraashtra .
ugraayudha2, a paancaala prince .
ugraayudha3, a kuru warrior .
ugraayudhasuta, a prince .
ujjaalaka, name of a lake .
ujjaanaka, name of a tirtha . y by bathing in u. and at the hermitage of aarshtishena, and at the hermitage of pingaa, one is purified from sins, etc .
ujjayana, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
ujjayanta, a mountain in the country of the suraashtras .
uktha, name of a fire .
ulmucu, v. unmucu.
ulmuka, a vrishni .
uluka1, kaitavya, son of shakuni . the following synonyms shaakuni, . kaitava, . kaitavya, .
uluka2, a naaga .
uluka3, one or more rishis . b, .
uluka5, pl a people .
uluka, pl. . praavaarakarna.
. . when the paandavas had encamped on the bank of the hiranvati, the kauravas also fixed their encampment. then duryodhana consulted with karna, etc and sent uluka to the paandavas and somakas in order to irritate them still more, with insulting messages to yudhishthira, krishna, etc. before arjuna he should mention the kaambojas, etc among his troops know that the gaandiva is full cubits long . uluka repeated the messages to the paandavas, etc and repeated his words to arjuna once more bhimasena and the rest became furious krishna counselled uluka to retire in time uluka once more repeated his words they became still more enraged, especially bhima, who said that he would certainly drink dushaasanas blood also sahadeva, etc gave him answers for duryodhana sahadeva would slay uluka before the eyes of shakuni, and then shakuni himself . arjuna said that duryodhanas contrivance of seeking cover behind bhishma would be of no avail, as he would himself slay bhishma the same said shikhandin dhrishtadyumna would slay drona with all his followers and friends. uluka related it all to duryodhana. messengers instructed by karna promulgated array to morrow before sunrise . dhrishtadyumna began to select combatants in order to pit them against particular warriors of the hostile force .
ulupi, daughter of the serpent king kauravya, wife of arjuna . u. is presumably the mother of iraavat . bhuja gaatmajaa, bhujagendrakanyaa, bhujagottamaa, kauravi, kaura vyaduhitri, kauravyakulanandini, pannaganandini, panna gasutaa, pannagaatmajaa, pannageshvarakanyaa, pannagi, uragaatmajaa. also kauravya .
uluta, see utula.
umaa, a goddess, daughter of himavat, wife of shiva . d, . u, . b, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . b, . b, . d, . f, . g, . also the following synonyms ambikaa, . aaryaa, . bhimaa, . shailaputri, . shailaraajasutaa, . shaakambhari, q.v. sharvaani, . deveshi, . devi, foll. passim, . durgaa, q.v. gauri, . girisutaa, girivaraatmajaa, . kaali, . mahaabhimaa, . mahaadevi, q.v. mahaakaali, . maheshvari, . maaheshvari, . parvataraajakanyaa, . paarvati, . rudraani, . rudrapatni, tribhuvaneshvari, . the following names of umaa occur in two separate hymns, viz . and, aaryaa, brahmanyaa, brahmavidyaa, candaa, candi, shaakambhaari, shvetaa, dhumraakshi, durgaa, hiranyaakshi, jaatavedasi, jayaa, kaitabhanaashini, kaali, kaapaali, kapilaa, karaali, kaalyaayani, kaushiki, kokamukhaa, krishnaa, krishnacchavisamaa, krishnapingalaa, kumaari, mahaadevi, mahaakaali, mahishaasuranaashini, mandara vaasini, pitavaasini, saavitri, skandamaatri, siddhasenaani, taarini, varavarnini, vijayaa, virupaakshi .
. b naarada said once, shiva on himavat, the resort of si. and caa practised severe penances, surrounded by aps etc. . then came umaa and with her hands covered the eyes of shiva from behind, and darkness arose all around but suddenly the darkness disappeared a third eye appeared on his forehead and consumed the mountain umaa stood before him with her hands joined he directed benignant looks towards the mountain, which, in a moment, was restored to its former condition. umaa asked why his eastern, northern, and western faces are so handsome, and the southern so terrible why his matted locks are tawny and erect why his throat is blue why he has always the pinaaka in his hand why he is always a brahmacaarin with matted locks . shiva promised to explain it to her . shiva answered the above questions in days of yore tilottamaa, created by brahmaan, circumambulated me in whatever direction she turned, a new face of mine appeared through my yoga power with my eastern face exercise the sovereignty of the universe with my northern sport with thee with my western ordain the happiness of creatures with my southern destroy all creatures. in order to good to all creatures. in days of yore, indra, desirous of acquiring my prosperity hurled his thunderbolt at me, which scorched my throat. in order to accomplish the purposes of the gods. umaa why hast thou selected a bull for thy vehicle shiva in days of yore, brahmaan created surabhi once, froth fell from one of her calves on my body my wrath scorched all the kine which became diversified in hue brahmaan pacified me and gave me this bull both as a vehicle and as a device. umaa why t thou reside in the cemetery, abaning thy many abodes in heaven shiva not see any spot that is more sacred than the cemetery, and my bhutas love to reside in such spots. umaa what are the indications of dharma shiva abstention from injury, etc. umaa what are the duties of the four castes shiva enumerated them. umaa what are the common duties of all the castes shiva whenever the world is created, three eternal religions are created by brahmaan the veda, the smriti, and the practice of the righteous, etc. there are four classes of bhikshus kuticaka, bahudaka, hamsa, and paramahamsa . umaa what is the religion of the rishis shiva the phenapas always gather the froth from the amrita that brahmaan drank at a great sacrifice. the vaalakhilyas in the solar disc, ating the practice of the birds, live by picking up grains, clad in deer skins or bark of trees they are only as big as the joint of the thumb they have burnt all their sins by severe penances. the cakracaras in the somaloka, near to pitriloka, live by gleaning, devoted to compassion. the samprakshaalas, ashmakuttas, and dantolukhalikas, near the gods somapas and ushmapas, live by gleaning, together with their wives, etc. . umaa what is the religion of the vaanaprasthas shiva described it they attain to brahmaloka or somaloka. umaa what is the religion of the munis in their trines of perfection they live unrestrained in the forest, together with their wives. shiva their characteristics are the shaving of the head, yellow robes, passing the night at home, ablutions three times a hotra, samaadhi, adherence to the path of the good, etc. all those duties of which have spoken before as belonging to forest recluses, are the duties of these also, etc. . asked by umaa, shiva said by fasts, etc one attains to heaven and sports with g. by mandukayoga and dikshaa with the naagas by living with deer, etc one attains to amaraavati by subsisting upon air or water, fruits and roots, one attains to the riches of y. and sports with aps. by abaning ones body in the ocean, having lived in dependence only of himself, etc one attains to the world of varuna by the same practices and piercing ones feet with a stone, one rejoices with the gh others obtain brahmaloka, shakraloka, etc. . asked by umaa, shiva expounded the circumstances under which one may be promoted or degraded to a higher or lower order when reborn . asked by umaa, shiva discoursed as to how men succeed in ascending to heaven, and what words, thoughts, and acts are of importance in this respect and for acquiring a long life. this is the way that was indicated by brahmaan himself . asked by umaa, shiva discoursed about that conduct by which a man may attain to heaven, quoting brahmaan the unmerciful, etc sink into hell they who humiliate their preceptors and seniors are reborn as shvapaakas and pukkasas. then he explained why some men become possessed of wis or the contrary, blind, diseased, etc. what acts are faulty, and what faultless why some are observant of vows, some like raa. in conduct, unmindful of homa and vashatkaara . naarada said now shiva himself became desirous of hearing. saying that umaa used to converse every day with saavitri, etc who all regard their husbands as their gods, he questioned umaa about the duties of women half of my body is made up of half thy body thon...art the cause of the peopling of the earth. umaa said she would first consult the rivers, who, with the waters of all tirthas, are approaching shiva in order to enable him to perform his ablutions sarasvati, going to the ocean, etc. . gangaa was selected for answering the question, and praised umaas modesty then umaa discoursed upon the duties of women in full. she should not cast her eyes on the moon or the sun or a tree that has a masculine name. the husband is the god of the woman. if a husband being poor, or diseased, or distressed, etc were to command his wife to accomplish anything improper or unrighteous, the wife should, without hesitation, so according to the practice allowable in time of distress, and she becomes entitled to a share in the merit acquired by her husband. naarada said shiva applauded umaa and dismissed the others bh etc returned home . asked by ri shiva discoursed on the glory of vaasudeva, i.e. krishna, q.v. . naarada said at the conclusion of shivas speech loud roars were heard in the firmament, etc. some of ri. set out on a tirthayaatraa, others returned whence they came.
umlocaa, an apsaras .
. b bhishma said m ri naarada wanders through all the worlds like vaayu, not obstructed by anything once he repaired to the abode of indra, who asked him if he had perceived any wonderful incident. naarada recited the following story in the town of mahaapadma, on the southern bank of the gangaa, there lived a brahman of the soma lineage, endued with amiability, etc. he was in great trouble with regard to the value of following the ordinances of the vedas, or the shaastras, or the duties that eminent men of former times have performed . then there came to him a wise brahman as a guest him he asked what he, having entrusted his duties as a householder to his son, should in order to perform the highest duty of men, as he had no respect for the religion of the yatis, who depend upon alms. the guest said that he was himself perplexed, as heaven had many rs he told him to repair to padma, the righteous naaga, who lived in the city called after the naagas in the naimisha forest, on the banks of the gomati, whence, in a former creation the wheel of righteous ness was set in motion, and where all the gods had, in days of old, performed a great sacrifice, and where king maandhaatri neglected indra . the host became delighted, and passed the night happily conversing with his guest about the fourth mode of life the next morning, having dismissed his guest, he set out for the abode of the naaga, was shown the way by an ascetic, and received by the beautiful wife of the naaga as the naaga had gone to draw the chariot of surya for a month, and would be back in seven or eight days, he passed this time on the banks of the gomali . on the day the naagas of the city, seeing him abstaining from food and reciting mantras, came and asked him to eat but he wanted to keep his fast for eight days if then the naaga chief had not come back, he would break his fast. then the naagas returned . when the naaga chief came home, he was informed by his wife about the brahmans arrival . the naaga bted whether that brahman was a human being, as the naagas, even by as and ri, are considered to be endued with great energy his wife told him to go and speak to the guest without the wrath which is natural to naagas the naaga himself also blamed wrath, citing raavana and the sons of kaartavirya and kaartavirya himself . the naaga met with the brahman on the banks of the gomati, engaged in yoga and reciting the vedas in order to dispel all evil from the naaga he asked the naaga whether he had seen anything wonderful in those regions where he had drawn the one wheeled chariot of vivasvat. the naaga described the wonders of which the sun is the source . the most wonderful was that one in former times, at the hour of noon, a being came through the sky like a second sun and entered surya . surya declared it to be a brahman, who had attained to heaven on account of his having been crowned with success in the gleaning vow, and because he had gratified bhava by praising him with samhitaa, and now he goes round the earth staying in the disc of surya neither nor g as nor pn. are superior to those creatures that attain to this excellent end . the brahman then betook himself formally to the practice of the uncha vow, and having saluted the naaga, he went to cyavana bhaargava, who initiated him and recited the story of the brahman in king janakas palace to ri. naarada indra the foremost brahmans. during my battle with raama, the vasus told it to me. the brahman proceeded to another forest .
unmaada1, a companion of skanda. u, .
unmaatha, a companion of skanda. u, .
unmuca, a rishi . next.
unmucu, a rishi . the prec.
unmukha v. ulmuka.
upacitra, a son of dhritaraashtra .
upashruti, a goddess . b, repetition from
upagahana, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
upajalaa, a river.
upakicaka, pl followers of kicaka, .
upakrishnaka, a warrior of skanda. u, .
upamanyu1, a brahman, disciple of aayoda dhaumya . upamanyu was sent to look after the kine. his master forbade him to enjoy the alms he received before he had offered it to him then, being deprived by the master of the whole alms, and forbidden to go begging a second time, or to drink of the milk of the cows, or the froth that the calves threw out when sucking, he ate of the leaves of the arka plant, whence he became blind and fell into a pit. aayoda dhaumya told u. to glorify the ashvins, which he did they gave him a cake which he would not apply without offering it to his preceptor, though the latter had himself formerly obtained a similar cake without offering it to his preceptor. the ashvins gave him teeth of gold, while those of his preceptor were of iron, and restored him to sight, .
upamanyu2, vaiyaaghrapadya, a rishi . g upamanyu said in the kritayuga there was a rishi named vyaaghrapaada. was born as his son and dhaumya as my younger brother. accompanied by dhaumya, once came to the hermitage of certain rishis. there saw milk, which appeared to me to be like to amrita. coming home, asked my mother to give me some food prepared with milk. having no milk my mother was sorry. she then took a cake and boiled it into water and placed it before me, saying that it was milk. knowing the nature of milk, understood that this was not milk this said to my mother, who then answered me that ascetics in the wood could not have milk. whence shall we, who live at the river, the resort of the vaalakhilyas, obtain milk in the wilderness are no offspring of surabhi. then she told me to devote myself to shankara . questioned by me about shiva my mother then, in accordance with the discourses of the munis, described the diverse forms of mahaadeva . then applied myself to the practice of penances in order to gratify shiva. after a thousand celestial years mahaadeva appeared to me in the form of shakra riding on his elephant, but did not desire a boon from any other deity than mahaadeva. questioned by indra about the reason, stated shiva to be the existent and the non existent, the manifest and the unmanifest, the eternal and immutable, etc and that there was nothing superior to shiva . mahaadeva resides in the worlds named bhu, etc. . in all the encounters of the gods, etc bhava restores power to those who meet with destruction. it is maheshvara who made futile the boons given to andhaka, etc. . he is aed by yogins, etc. . brahmaan, etc always say that there is none higher than mahaadeva. his sign is worshipped by brahmaan, etc. the creatures bear only the signs of mahaadeva and his spouse, and those of brahmaan, etc. . shall never acknow ledge any other deity. nor would take the fulfilment of all my wishes from any other deity. when had finished this speech, the celestial elephant became transformed into a white bull, on the back of which mahaadeva, with umaa, was seated . the paashupata weapon is superior to all other weapons such as the braahma, etc but the shula is even superior. shiva was also armed with the battle axe, which he had given to raama jaamadagnya . he was surrounded by brahmaan, etc. . the deities praised shiva by uttering diverse hymns . then praised him with a hymn and offered him arghya . shiva became gratified and granted me the fulfilment of all my wishes. once more praised him and asked that and my kinsmen and friends might always eat food with milk. shiva granted this, and that after the expiration of a kalpa should obtain the companionship of shiva. then the god disappeared, .
upananda1, name of a tabour . upanandaka3.
upananda2, a son of dhritaraashtra . next.
upanandaka1, a son of dhritaraashtra . upananda.
upanandaka2, a serpent .
upanandaka3, name of a tabour . upananda1.
upanandaka4, a warrior of skanda. u, .
upaanga, pl .
upanishad, mostly pl . mahopanishad.
upaplavya, name of a city near to the capital of the matsya king viraata . upaplava.
upasunda, an asura, brother of sunda . asura.
upaveda, pl. . d, .
upavenaa, a river .
upavritta, pl a people .
upayaaja, a brahmarshi . kaashyapa, dual.
upendraa, a river .
uraga1, mostly pl .
uraga2, pl a people, .
uragaa, name of a city .
urdhvabaahu, a rishi .
urdhvabhaaj, name of a fire .
urdhvaretas1, a brahman . do. = shiva .
urdhvavenidharaa, a maatri. u, .
urjaskara said of fires, .
urjayoni, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
urmilaa, wife of yama .
urnanaabha, a son of dhritaraashtra .
urnaayu, a gandharva . . . .
urva, a rishi. c, . aurva.
urvashi, an apsaras, wife of pururavas . b, . b, .
urvashi, name of a tirtha. u, . next.
urvashitirtha, name of a tirtha . the prec.
urvaraa, an apsaras. b, .
ushangu1, a rishi .
ushinara, v. ushinara.
ushman, name of a fire . also, .
ushmapaa, a class of pitris or rishis . b, . b, .
ushna, a region in krauncadvipa .
ushnapa, v. ushmapa.
ushniganga, a tirtha .
ushninaabha, a vishvadeva .
ushtrajihva, a warrior of skanda. u, .
ushtrakarnika, pl a people .
utanka, v. uttanka.
utathya, a rishi, son of angiras . b, . b, . j vaayu said the beautiful bhadraa, the daughter of soma, was destined by her father to become the wife of the brahman u. of angiras race and she underwent severe austerities for this purpose. then atri invited u. and gave her to him. varuna had coveted the girl from former times he came to the forest and stole her away, when she bathed in the yamunaa, and carried her to his wonderful city, aned with, lakes with palaces and apsarases, etc. having heard all this from naarada, u. caused him to request varuna to restore her . as varuna refused, and naarada related to u. that varuna had seized him by the throat and driven him from his house, u. stopped the waters and drank them off, and caused. the earth to dry up the, lakes, and the sarasvati to become invisible, and the region to cease to be sacred. then varuna restored bhadraa to u who then freed the world and varuna from distress. name thou a kshatriya who is superior to u . angiras5, aangirasa2.
utkala, pl a people .
utkocaka, a tirtha .
utkraathini, a maatri. u
utkrosha, a companion of skanda. u, .
utpalaavana, a tirtha . o, .
utpalaavati, a river .
utpalini, a river .
utpaataka, a tirtha. r by bathing in u. in ashtaarakra and offering oblations to the pitris, and for twelve days abstaining from food one obtains to the merit of a horse sacrifice, .
utsavasanketa, pl a people . dhvajinyutsavasanketa.
uttama, a prince .
uttama, pl a people .
uttamaujas, a paancaala prince, brother of yudhaamanyu อด, อด, . paancaalya, srinjaya.
uttanka, a rishi . u. was the disciple of veda having resisted the temptations of the wife of veda, he obtained leave to depart, but first wished to bring veda some gratuity for his instruction, and having uttered this wish two times, he was ordered to procure the ear rings of paushyas queen for the wife of veda. having met with a bull and a man mounted upon it, he ate of the dung and drank of the urine of that bull, as his master had formerly e. coming to the abode of paushya, he could not discover the queen before he had purified himself properly from the leavings of his last meal. he and paushya cursed one another. having obtained the ear rings, u. returned to his master. on the road takshaka, the king of the serpents, in the shape of a mendicant, stole the ear rings and proceeded to naagaloka. indra, with the thunderbolt, made a hole through which u. entered the naagaloka, where he hymned the serpents. he there saw two damsels sitting over a loom, weaving a fabric with black and white threads, further, he saw a wheel with twelve spokes turned by six boys, and then a man mounted on a horse . at the injunction of the man u. blew into the anus of the horse, whence there issued flames of fire with smoke, which were about to consume the naagaloka. takshaka then gave back the ear rings and u. was borne by the horse to his masters abode. his master explained to him all he had seen during his journey. u. then proceeded to haastinapura and told janamejaya, who had some time before returned victorious from takshashilaa, to burn takshaka, who had bitten parikshit to death, and caused kaashyapa to turn back without relieving parikshit, at a snake sacrifice, . b, . b when krishna, on his way from haastinapura to dvaarakaa, had entered the desert, he beheld u who enquired whether he came after having reconciled the kurus and the paandavas. krishna told him the matter filled with wrath u. threatened to curse him krishna warned u. against destroying his penances . u. agreed that krishna should first tell him that faultless adhyaatma, and krishna explained his own identity with the creator and destroyer of all things. r dai y g raa n and aps. have sprung from me etc. dharma, whose essence is compassion for all creatures, is my eldest born offspring, and has sprung from my mind am vishnu, brahmaan, and shakra . he always acts as those beings in whose order he lives . u. pre vailed upon krishna to show him his eternal vaishnava or universal form, and praised krishna, who granted him the boon to have water wherever he wished for it by thinking of krishna. once, when u. was wandering thirsty in the desert, and thought of krishna, he saw a naked caandaala all besmeared with dirt, surrounded by a pack of s, and carrying a sword, and bow, and arrows from his urinary organs there issued copious streams of water he invited u. to accept this water u. refused and even censured krishna, the caandaala dis appeared. krishna came and said that the caandaala was indra, whom he had ordered to give amrita to u. in the form of water, and that indra at first had refused to it, but at last had agreed on the condition that u. should accept it in that way. krishna ordained that on those days in which u. would feel a desire for water, there should rise clouds raining savoury water over this desert and that they should be named u. clouds even to this day such clouds shower rain on the arid desert asked by janamejaya about the penances of u vaishampaayana related that u.s preceptor gautama, having permitted thousands of disciples to return home, was so pleased with the devotion of u. that he would not dismiss him, even after years, and decrepitude over took u. one day when he threw the load of fuel he had fetched on the earth, one of his matted locks, white as silver, had become entangled with the load and fell on the earth beholding that sign of old age, u. gave himself up to loud lamentations the beautiful daughter of his preceptor, at the command of her father, sought to hold the tears of u. in her hands, but her hands seemed to burn with the dropping tears, and she was obliged to let them fall on the earth the earth was unable to hold them. asked by gautama, u. explained the matter. gautama permitted him to leave him as u. spoke of the fee, gautama said that he was already highly gratified and that if u. became a young man of sixteen years, he would give him his daughter in marriage. u. again became a youth and accepted the maiden. as he spoke of the fee to his preceptors wife, ahalyaa said that she was already gratified. u however, insisted, and ahalyaa then commanded him to bring her the celestial ear rings which were borne by the wife of saudaasa, who had become a cannibal. gautama blamed ahalyaa that she had sent u. to the cannibal. ahalyaa said that she had e it unknowingly, and that gautama would protect u. u. met saudaasa in a deserted forest . saudaasa was of frightful mien, wearing a long beard smeared with human blood, and looking like a second yama he congratulated himself that he had met u. at the sixth hour of the day when he was in search of food u. maintained that while one is employed for the sake of his preceptor, one should not be injured at last they agreed that when he had brought his preceptor the ear rings he should come back saudaasa told u. to go and see the queen madayanti, as he could not himself see her at the sixth hour. madayanti told u. to bring her some sign from her husband, as these ear rings, when placed on the earth, would be stolen by the naagas, if worn by one who is impure from eating, they would be taken away by the yakshas, and if the wearer fell asleep, the gods would take them away also the maharshis and the raakshasas watch for opportunities for carrying them away they always produce gold and shine brightly at night they protect against hunger, and thirst, and fear, and he who wears them grows in size . u. came back to saudaasa, who gave him a sign. when he had got the ear rings, u. once more came back to saudaasa, and asked him about the meaning of the mystic words he had caused him to say to madayanti, as a sign. saudaasa, referring to his own terrible condition in consequence of his being cursed, said that he hoped that this gift to a brahman might save him. u. asked saudaasa to give him such advice as is approved by the wise is it proper for me to come back to thee or not saudaasa said that he would then tell him never to come back. when u on his way to ahalyaa, having bound the ear rings in the folds of his black deerskin, had proceeded for some distance he became afflicted with hunger and climbed a bilva tree, hanging his deerskin on a branch, while he plucked some fruits. struck by some fruits the deerskin fell n, the knot was untied, and a serpent of airaavatas race carried the ear rings, holding them in his mouth, into an anthill. filled with wrath, u. with his staff, pierced that anthill for thirty five days, desirous of making a path to the nether regions the goddess earth became anxious indra came there in the disguise of a brahman afflicted with the sorrow of u and told him that the regions of the naagas are thousands of yojanas distant as u. did not desist, indra united the latters staff with his thunderbolt, and struck with the thunderbolt, the earth opened a way to the naagaloka . u. entered the naagaloka, very cheerless then there appeared to him a black steed with a white tail, whose face and eyes were of coppery hue. he told u. to blow into his anus, which thou often didst at the retreat of gautama in former days the horse turned out to be agni u. did as he was directed, a thick smoke enveloped the naagaloka, the naagas, headed by vaasuki, gave u. the ear rings, which he brought to ahalyaa, . bhaargava, bhrigudvaha, bhrigukulodvaha, bhrigunandana.
uttara1, son of viraata . bhuminjaya, kaikeyinandivardhana, matsya, maatsya, matsyaputra, matsyavira, prithivinjaya, vairaati, viraataputra.
uttara2, a prince .
uttaraa, daughter of viraata, wife of abhimanyu, mother of parikshit . vairaati, viraataduhitri, viraatatanayaa, abhimanyor bhaaryaa .
uttaraa, sc. dish, .
uttaraagni, name of a fire .
uttaraa ashaadhaa, v. ashaadhaa.
uttaraa kurava, a people . g to the south of nila and to the north of meru are u.k where the siddhas reside, there the trees are always covered with sweet fruits and flowers, some of them yield fruits according to the will some of them are called kshirins and yield milk and six different rasas like amrita, and clothes and ornaments the entire land has fine golden sands a portion of it is ruby, etc all the seasons are agreeable and nowhere s the land become miry. the men born there have fallen from the devaloka, and are all of pure birth and handsome they are born twins, and the women are like aps. in beauty they are free from illness and cheerful, they live, years. the birds named bhaarundaa take them up when dead and throw them into mountain caves, . i, . c, . g gautama said there where the u.k. blaze in beauty rejoicing with the gods, where dwell the people sprung from agni, water, and mountains, where shakra rains all wishes, where women live in perfect free, where there is no jealousy among women and men, etc. dhritaraashtra said this region is for those who are freed from all desire, who abstain from meat, who never take up the rod of chastisement, and never inflict harm on mobile or immobile creatures, who regard themselves as identical with all creatures, who have no wishes and are indifferent, and freed from affections regarding gain and loss, and to whom blame and praise are equal, . e, .
uttaraa phalgunya, v. phalguni.
uttaraa proshthapadaa, v. proshthapadaa.
uttarajyotisha, a city .
uttaramaanasa, a sacred lake. b, . z, .
uttaraapatha1 . do pl. .
uttara yayaatyupaakhyaana, v. yayaati .
uttejani, a maatri. u, .
utula, pl a people .
vaacaspati1 . b, . do. = mahaapurusha . do. = vishnu .
vaacaaviruddhaa, a class of gods .
vaacikaa, adj. . b
vasha, pl a people .
vashaatala, pl a people .
vashaati, vashaatika, vashaatiya, v. vas.
vashishtha, vaashishtha, vashishthaapavaaha, v. vas, vaas.
vaadaanya, a rishi. b, .
vadavaa, the mother of the horses .
vadavaa, name of a tirtha. in . one should in the evening offer caru to the fire this is equal to hundred thousands of kine, hundred raajasuyas, and a thousand horse sacrifices here a gift to the pitris becomes inexhaustible. here the rishis, the pitris, the gods, the gandharvas, the apsarases, the guhyakas, the kinnaras, the yakshas, the siddhas, the vidyaadharas, men, the raakshasas, the daityas, the rudras, and brahmaan himself practised austerities for, years in order to gratify vishnu, then they cooked caru and praised keshava each with seven rices. keshava conferred eightfold aishvarya, etc on them, and then dis appeared, therefore that tirtha became known by the name of saptacaru, .
vadavaa, a river .
vadavaamukha1, name of the submarine fire at vadavaa mukha. b, . b, . vadavaavaktra. do. = shiva .
vadavaamukha3, a rishi. b, maharshi, incarnation of naaraayana, cursed the ocean, saying that its water should only be drinkable for the vadavaamukha
vadavaamukha . b, sanjnitena, drinks the water of the oceanaanushaasanik.shivathe face of shivam
vaaddhika error in c. for baalhika .
vadhna, pl. v. vadhra, pl.
vadhra, pl a people .
vadhryashva, an ancient king .
vadhusaraa, a river .
vaaduli, see vaahuli.
vaagindra, a brahman. b, .
vaagmin, a prince . do. = vishnu .
vaaheyika, vahi, vaahika, v. baaheyika, etc.
vaahikapungava, so b. for baalhika .
vaahini, wife of kuru .
vaahini, a river .
vahni2, an ancient king . b, .
vahni3, = vishnu .
vahnidaivata, adj. .
vaahuli, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
vaahyaalaya, abode of out castes, i.e. the country of the vaahikas, .
vaicitraviryaka, adj. .
vaishaakha, name of a month .
vaishaakhi, the day of full moon in the month of vaishaakha .
vaishaalaaksha, adj. .
vaishaaleya, pl a family of serpents อด, .
vaishampaayana, a rishi, disciple of vyaasa recited the mhbhr. at the snake sacrifice of janamejaya, or, . brahmarshi, vyaasashishya.
vaisheshika, adj .
vaishravana, adj. .
vaishravana sabhaa varnana . the sabhaa of vaishravana is yojanas in length and in breadth, acquired by vaishravana by his ascetic power it is supported by guhyakas attached to the firmament, and capable of moving along it. there sits vaishravana with thousands of wives, amidst the fragrance of the lotuses of the nalini alakaa and the nandana gardens, and the gods, gandharvas, apsarases, yakshas, lakshmi, nalakubara, myself, many devarshis and brahmarshis, kravyaadas, umaapati, with hosts of spirits, and devi, and gandharva chiefs, and cakradharman, the chief of the vidyaadharas, bhagadatta, and innumerable other kings, and druma, the chief of the kimpurushas, and the raakshasa king mahendra gandhamaadana, and vibhishana, and the mountains himavat, etc in their personified forms, and nandishvara and mahaakaala, and many paarishadas with arrowy ears and mouths, kaashtha, kutimukha, dantin, and vijayaa, and the roaring white bull, and pishaacas. paulastya always aes shiva, and sometimes is honoured by his visit. there also the best of jewels, shankha and padma, those princes of all gems, accompanied by all the jewels of the earth, worship kubera .
vaishvadeva, adj. . b, . g, . do subst. neutr name of a certain offering .
vaishvaanara2, a muni .
vaishvaanara, pl a class of rishis .
vaishvaanari, adj. f. said of the earth .
vaidarbha, the father of lopaamudraa .
vaidarbhi, the father of lopaamudraa .
vaidarbhi, wife of sagara .
vaideha1, a prince contemporary with yudhishthira .
vaideha5, name of a mixed caste, .
vaidehaka, adj. .
vaidehi, the wife of shataanika2 .
vaidika, adj .
vaiduryashikhara, a mountain next.
vaiduryaparvata, a mountain .
vaidya1, adj . do mostly pl . do name of a caste, .
vaidya4 . v. raibhya.
vaihaara, a mountain near girivraja .
vaihaayasa1, pl a class of rishis. b, .
vaihaayasa2, name of a lake .
vaijayanta1, the standard of indra .
vaijayanta2, a mountain. d, .
vaijayanti adj said of garlands, .
vaijayanti, dual, name of the bells of airaavata .
vaikhaanasa1, pl a class of rishis . u, . b, learnt the religion of naaraayana from the phenapaa and communicated it to somasuvarnotpattiarose from the ashes of the sacrificial fireaanushaasanik.aanaam vacanam rishinaam, a sentence of theirs quoted
vaikhaanasa3, adj. . l, .
vaimaanika1, name of a tirtha. k by bathing in . and kinkinikaashrama one acquires the merit of repairing everywhere at will. the merit of bathing in kaalikaashrama, etc .
vaimaanika2, adj .
vainateya2, a suparna, son of garuda .
vainateya2, pl. อด, .
vainya, v. vainya.
vairaaja1, pl a class of pitris .
vairaaja3, adj. . d, .
vairaama, pl a people .
vairaata, a son of dhritaraashtra .
vairaata, adj. .
vairaati4, v. vairaati.
vaishnava, adj. . d, . f, . c, . u, . f, . b, . b, ashvamedham yajnamaanushaasanik.i, said of wealth given instead of kinecandralokaai, sc. the earthtejauttankavapurupammahaabhaarataa worshipper of vishnupadam, yashapadam
vaishnavaastra . c krishna has four forms
vaitahavya, pl. . b, .
vaitaalika, pl .
vaitaalin, a warrior of skanda. u, .
vaitarani, one or more rivers, also the river in the region of yama. b, . b on the . dharma performed sacrifices, placing himself under the protection of the gods on the northern bank rishis formerly and now performed sacrifices it is equal to the path of the gods to a man who has attained to svarga. there rudra seized the sacrificial beast as his share, but having been satisfied by sacrifice he gave up the beast and went by the path of the gods . from fear of rudra the gods reserved the best of all shares for him. he, who reciting this gaathaa performs his ablutions there, sees with his eyes the path of the gods, .
vaitrakiyavana, see vetrakiyavana.
vaittapaalya, adj. . b, .
vaivaahika, adj. .
. . dhrishtadyumna related what had happened from their conversation on military subjects, he concluded that they were the paandavas, of whom it had been heard that they had all escaped from the lac house. drupada sent his purohita to yudhishthira, who said that there was no occasion for drupada to grieve for his daughter. while yudhishthira was saying this, another messenger from drupada announced that the feast was ready . the paandavas, with kunti and krishnaa were conveyed to drupadas palace. drupada wished to ascertain to which caste they belonged, and had for that purpose made ready a large collection of various articles appertaining to different human occupations after dinner they began to observe, with interest, the imple ments of war, wherefore drupada and his son thought that they were of royal blood . yudhishthira told drupada who they were. drupada vowed to restore yudhi shthira to his king. yudhishthira told him that they would all marry krishnaa, which drupada considered to be contrary to morality. while they discoursed on this matter vyaasa arrived . drupada consulted vyaasa about the wedding of his daughter. vyaasa desired to hear the opinion of each of them. drupada regarded the practice of marrying one wife to five men as sinful, and so did dhrishtadyumna. yudhishthira thought it not to be sinful, because his heart, that never inclined to what was sinful, approved of it it is recorded in the puraana that jatilaa gautami had married seven rishis, and a munis daughter, born of a tree married the ten pracetases moreover, their mother kunti had told them to enjoy her all. kunti was afraid that she would be guilty of a lie. vyaasa said that yudhishthira was right, and took drupada apart and related to him pancendropaakhyaana . . drupada then consented, as it had been ordained by the gods. vyaasa declared that very day to be auspicious as the moon entered in conjunction with pushya . drupada and his son made preparations for the wedding, and dhaumya, performing the usual rites, married krishnaa to yudhishthira, and then to his brothers on successive days. draupadi regained her virginity every day after her previous marriage. then drupada gave to them various kinds of excellent wealth . drupada, after his alliance with the paandavas, had all his fears dispelled. his ladies worshipped the feet of kuniti. kunti pronounced a blessing upon krishnaa. krishna sent them costly presents .
. . on the third day the five paandavas, attired in white robes after a bath, etc entered the palace of viraata and took their seats on the thrones reserved for kings. viraata rebuked kanka for this insolence arjuna praised yudhishthira, saying that there was none like him, even amongst as men, raa g y ku or m. u and disclosed that he was yudhishthira . asked by viraata which of them then was arjuna, etc arjuna pointed out bhima, nakula, and sahadeva, draupadi, and himself. uttara spoke of arjunas prowess, and described each of them, especially arjuna . viraata, thinking he had offended yudhishthira, offered to bestow his daughter uttaraa on arjuna, which was applauded by uttara, and offered his whole king, etc to yudhishthira. arjuna accepted uttaraa as his daughter in law, saying that such an alliance between the matsyas and the bharatas was desirable . asked by viraata why he himself did not wish to accept his daughter as wife, arjuna alleged that she had confided in him as her father, and people might entertain suspicions against her or him by accepting her for abhimanyu he attested her purity. viraata approved of it, and yudhishthira gave his assent the latter sent invitations to krishna, etc and so did viraata. the paandavas took up their abode at upaplavya. arjuna brought over abhimanyu and krishna, and many dashaarhas from the aanartta country. the kaashi king and shaibya came, each accom panied by an akshauhini of troops yajnasena came there with the sons of draupadi and shikhandin, and dhrishtadyumna came with an akshauhini. all the kings that came there were lords of akshauhinis and performers of sacrifices, etc. then came krishna, balaraama, etc with abhimanyu and his mother. and indrasena, etc having lived at dvaarakaa for a whole year, came with the chariots of the paandavas. in the train of krishna came also, elephants, thousands of horses, millions of chariots, milliards of foot soldiers, and innumerable vrishni, andhaka, and bhoja warriors. krishna gave to each of the paandavas numerous female slaves, etc. then the nuptial festival set in . the matrons of the matsyas were headed by sudeshnaa but krishnaa was the foremost in beauty, etc. viraata gave, horses and elephants, and much wealth, and offered his king, etc to the paandavas. yudhishthira gave all the wealth that had been brought by krishna, etc to the brahmans .
vaivasvata4, adj. abelonging to vivasvatbhishmavadhap.savitur m, sc. astriamputradarshanap.lokami.e. manu
vaivasvatasya tirtha, name of a tirtha. q, .
. . requested by yudhishthira, maarkandeya said the maharshi manu, vivasvats son, equal to prajaapati, excelled his father and grand father in strength, etc. he practised austerities in badari, standing on one foot, etc for, years. once a small fish came to him on the banks of the cirini and asked his protection from the greater fishes. he first reared it in a water vessel, and as it grew larger, he carried it to a large tank, and thence into the gangaa, and at last into the ocean. the fish, saying that the world was about to be destroyed, caused him to build a strong ship with a long rope and ascend it with the seven rishis and the seeds that were enumerated by the brahmans of old. the fish then appeared and was recognized by a horn, to which manu tied the noose. and, while there was water everywhere, the fish dragged the boat through the flood for many years, until, advised by the fish, manu tied the ship to the highest peak of himavat, thence called naubandhana. the fish told him that he was brahmaan, and caused manu to create by austerities all creatures with gods, asuras, and men. this is the maatsyakam puraanam .
vaiyamaka, pl a people .
vaajapeya, name of a certain kind of soma sacrifice, .
vaajin, pl. .
vajra1, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
vajra2, a yaadava prince .
vajra3, the thunderbolt of indra . d when the thunderbolt of indra was hurled at vritras head it broke into, pieces that which is known in the world as glory, is a portion of the thunderbolt, therefore the horses of the kshatriyas chariot ought not to be slain, . b, . b, made by dhaatri from the bones of dadhica names1
vajra, name of a vyuha . vajraakhya.
vajrabaahu, a monkey .
vajrashirsha, a son of bhrigu. b, .
vajradatta, king of praagjyotisha, the son of bhagadatta . bhagadattaja, bhagadattasuta, bhagadattaatmaja, praagjyotishaadhipa.
vajraakhya, name of a vyuha, .
vajranaabha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
vajranaabha, adj said of the discus of krishna, .
vajranishkambha, v. vajravishkambha.
vajravega, a raakshasa, brother of dushana and pramaathin . dushanaanuja, dushanaavaraja, rakshas.
vajravishkambha, a suparna, son of garuda .
vajrin3, a vishvadeva .
vaaka, pl .
vakanaka v. bakanakha.
vakra, one or more princes . dantavakra, karushaadhipati .
vakraatapa, pl a people .
vakshogriva, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
vaalakhilya, pl certain pigmy rishis . shaunaka asked some questions on the omens foreboding fear . sauti related once when kashyapa was sacrificing from desire of offspring, assisted by the rishis, gods, and gandharvas, indra, who had been appointed to bring the sacrificial fuel together with the . and the other deities insulted the whose bodies were of the size of a thumb, all together carrying one single stalk of a palaasha leaf, and much afflicted when sunk in the water collected in the footstep of a cow. the . then sacrificed to effect that there should be another indra. indra repaired to kashyapa he reminded them that brahmaan himself had made indra the lord of the three worlds the . then declared that their effort had also been meant for the son wished for by him. meanwhile aruna and garuda were begotten and destined by kashyapa to become the brothers and helpmates of indra, . b, . b, . h, . u, . f, . b, rishinaanushaasanik.disregarded by indra, the . gratified shiva, who granted them that they should create a bird that would rob the amrita from indra, upamanyunadim...air nishevitaamsuvarnotpattitheir originshapathavidhiaanushaa sanik.umaa maheshvarasamv.gane, b. ganaisuryamandaledescriptionaanushaasanik.
valgujangha, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
vaalishikha, a serpent .
vaalikhilya, v. vaalakhilya.
vaalin1, an asura .
vaalin2, a monkey king, brother of sugriva . b, . shakraputra.
valkala, pl a people .
vallabha, an ancient king. b, .
vallabha, pl a people .
vaalmika, a rishi . next.
vaalmiki, a rishi . bhaargava .
vaalmiki2, a suparna, son of garuda .
vaama1, b, .
vaama2, a rishi .
vaamaa, a matri. u, .
vaamadeva1, a rishi .
vaamadeva2, a prince .
. . as yudhishthira wished to hear about the greatness of brahmans, maarkandeya related king parikshit, in ayodhyaa, of the race of ikshvaaku, was, in the forest, led far away by a deer, and by a tank met with a beautiful maiden, who came along singing. he married her after having given her the pledge not to let her see water, and having arrived at his capital he lived with her in privacy, and nobody could obtain any interview with him. his chief minister, having found out the matter, made an artificial forest, with a tank covered with a net of pearls, and showed it to the king. the king told his wife to plunge into this tank. she did so, and did not reappear. when the water had been baled out a frog was found. the king ordered all frogs to be slaughtered. aayu, the king of the frogs, in the shape of an ascetic, told him that the queen was his daughter sushobhanaa, who had deceived many kings. she was restored to the king, but aayu cursed her, saying thy offspring shall prove disrespectful to brahmans. parikshit begot three sons on her shala, dala, and bala. having installed shala on the throne, parikshit retired to the wood. one shala, as he could not overtake a deer, forced his charioteer to indicate to him, to whom the vaamya horses be longed. he borrowed them from the rishi vaamadeva and caught the deer, but did not return them. after a month, vaamadeva in vain sent his disciple aatreya, and then came himself, and asked for the steeds. the king, saying that such horses were not fit for brahmans, in vain offered to give him two bulls, then four asses or four mules, and as he threatened to let him be killed, vaamadeva, saying that brahmans could not be punished, let four raakshasas slay him with their lances. dala, whom the ikshvaakus installed on the throne, attempted to shoot vaamadeva with a poisoned arrow, but shot his own son shyenajit, and was unable to discharge another poisoned arrow. then he gave way, and, advised by vaamadeva, he touched his queen with the arrow and was thus purified of his sin. the queen obtained the boon from vaamadeva, that she might prevail upon her husband that they both should serve the brahmans, and he be freed from his sin, and that vaamadeva should think of their weal. the king became glad and restored the vaamya horses .
vaamadeva upaakhyaana .
vaamaka, name of a caste, .
vaamana1, a serpent .
vaamana2, name of a tirtha .
vaamana3, a suparna, son of garuda .
vaamana4, name of one of the elephants of the quarters . c, .
vaamana5, a mountain in kranncadvipa . vaamanaka2.
vaamana8, adj .
vaamana, pl a people .
vaamanaka1, a tirtha .
vaamanikaa, a maatri. u, .
vamshaa, one of the daughters of praadhaa .
vamshagulma, a tirtha .
vamshamulaka, a tirtha .
vaamya, dual, the horses of vaamadeva .
vaanara, pl. .
vaanava, pl a people .
vanavaasaka, pl a people .
vanaayu1, an asura .
vanaayu2, a prince .
vanaayu3, pl a people .
vanaayuja . adj. said of horses .
vandanaa, name of a river .
vandi or vandin, a suta, son of varuna . sauti.
vandin, pl .
vaaneya, pl a class of munis, .
vaneyu, a prince .
vanga1, a prince . .
vanga2, a vanga king of the past . the prec.
vanga3, the vanga king at the time of yudhishthira .
vanga4, the country of the vangas .
vanga, pl a people . g, .
vaani, a river .
vankshu, a river, probably the oxus .
vapu, an apsaras .
vapushmati, a maatri. u, .
vapushtamaa, the wife of janamejaya paarikshita .
varaa, a river .
varada2, a warrior of skanda. u, .
varadaa, a river .
varadaana, a tirtha .
varadhaana, error in c. for vatadhaana.
varaaha1, a muni .
varaaha2, a mountain .
varaaha3, an asura .
vaaraaha1 v. varaaha4.
vaaraaha2, name of one or more tirthas .
vaaraaha, adj . do said of maatris, .
vaaraahaashva, v. varaaha3.
varaahaka, a serpent .
varaahakarna, a yaksha .
vaaraahaparvata, a mountain. b, .
varaahaavataara . bis . asked by yudhishthira lomasha related in the krita yuga, when the primeval deity assumed the function of yama, the creatures did not die, and multiplied to such a degree that the earth sank yojanas. she applied to naaraayana, who, in the shape of a boar with a single tusk, lifted her up by means of that. the gods, with the rishis, became afraid of the agitation produced, but learnt the matter from brahmaan, and with him they went to nandana, there vishnu was sitting in the shape of a boar with shrivatsa on his breast, together with suparna, and having seen him they returned home .
varajaanuka, a muni .
vaarana, name of a country.
vaaranaahvaya, adj. or subst. = haastinapura, .
vaaranasaahvaya, adj. or subst. = haasti napura, .
varaanasi, a river .
vaaraanasi, a city in the country of the kaashis, the present benares . c, . g, . b, . b, . b, . b, . kaashinagara, kaashipura, kaashipuri.
vaaranaavata, a city . f, อด, .
vaaranaavataka, adj. .
varaangi, a princess, daughter of drishadvat and wife of samyaati .
vaarapaashyaapavaaha, pl names of peoples .
vaaravaasyaayavaaha, pl v. vaarapaashyaapavaaha.
vaaravatyaa, a river .
varayu, a king .
varcas1, son of soma.
varcas3, son of sucetas. b, .
varcasvin1, son of varcas1 . . do. = shiva .
vaarddhakshemi, a vrishni prince . vaarshneya.
vardhamaanadvaara, name of a gate in haastinapura .
vardhamaanapuradvaara =, .
vardhana1, a companion of skanda. u, . do. = shiva . do. = vishnu
vargaa, an apsaras .
varin, a vishvadeva .
vaaripa varuna, .
vaarishena, an ancient king .
varishtha2, son of manu caakshusha .
varitaaksha, an asura. b, .
vaarkshi, a daughter of a muni .
vaarshaganya, a rishi .
vaarshneya1, the charioteer of nala, afterwards of rituparna .
vaarshneya4 cekitaana, .
vaarshneya9, adj. .
vaartta, an ancient king .
varuna, a god, one of the aadityas as lord of the waters one of the lokapaalas, armed with nooses . b, . b, . c, . b, . c, d, atra i.e. in the west pitvaa samastaan vai sya rasaan shat jaayate taruna soma shuklasyaadauaalayehusband of gauri, reme...sh ca yathaa gauryaamsyaalayam . gave, horses to ricika, and bbhagavadyaanap.dharma bound the daityas and daanavas and handed them over to who keeps them in the depths of the oceanraajaa, had been vanquished by krishnasainyaniryaanap.ulukadutaagamanap.saagaro aalayabhagavadgitaap.o yaadasaam aham, sc. asmi, says krishnakrishna identified with .bhishmavadhap.a paashabhrid vaapi, sc. shakyo jetumajeyam... ena, sc. ghatotkacaa paashadhrig vaapi, sc. shakyo jetumshakyo...jetumsadrisha...syadronaabhishekap.yama vaishravanaaditya mahendra opamam, sc. uttamaujasamyaahir abhisamvritam, had been vanquished by krishna in the seapratijnaap.arjuna had obtained weapons from etc.jayadrathavadhap.a paashavaan ivashrutaayudhasyaatmaja, i.e. shrutaayudha. had, with the river parnaashaa, the son shrutaayudha, whom he gave a mace and instructed its naturejayadrathavadhap.yathoktam ena, all. to bbrahmeshaanendra aan avahad puraa ratha, sc. the chariot of arjunaghatotkaca vadhap.aatmajopamaajaleshvara...notsahet karnamnaaraayanaastra mokshap.shiva identified with . karnap.yama kubera vaasavaaaad vaapi paashinapraticim  paati paalayaana suraan baliarjunabrahmeshaanendra aan kramasho yo vahat puraa, sc. ratha, i.e. the chariot of arjunakarnap.m ko mbhasaa hanyaatsided with arjunaskandayathaa...m jaleshvaram...abhyasincat...brahmaagave two companions to skandagave a naaga to skandabaladevatirthayaatraaapaam pati, anointed in the tirtha taijasa, vin a former kalpaat the tirtha taijasasaagaraalayamyaadasaam patimyamunaatirthaputro diteper formed a raajasuya in yamunaatirthaasita devalamitraa yor lokaanbaladevatirtha yaatraamitraa yo...aashramamgadaayuddhap.sadrishakarmaanau sya, sc. bhimasena and duryodhanaraajadh.arjuna had obtained weapons from etc.among the gods, etc who are slaughterersshodasharaaj cf v. maruttasa aa...devaa, came to the sacrifice of maruttaraajadh.the sheep identified with .apaam raajye suraanaan ca vidadhe m, sc. vishnupavana shaalmalisamv.jaleshvaramokshadh.yaadasaam asrijan naatham n ca jaleshvaram, sc. krishnathe fifth of the aadityas mitraa yo putra...agastyabali vaasava samv.bali identified with .tulaadhaara jaajalisamv.the sheep identified with .mokshadh.identified with the supreme lorddakshayajna vinaashaaalaya, i.e. the oceanmokshadh.siddhin ca devim sya patnimonly b c. has by error vaavishvaamitrop.devam aadityam ambhasaam patimaaditya, gave, horses to ricika, and aanushaasanik.shiva identified with .endu, identified with shivagopaashtaavakra diksamv.aanushaa sanik.aishvarye o raajaathe sheep identified with .suvarnotpattiidentified with shivashiva assumed the form of . and performed a sacrificemahaadeva, = ishvara, yaadasaam patiishvara, at the sacrifice arose bhrigu, etc who were reckoned as the offspring of .taarakavadhop.made presents to skandaaanushaasanik.chattropaanahotpattigaambhiryam syaaanushaasanik.to . offerings should be made in the west praticyaamvarunalokasya raajna sadaneumaa maheshvarasamv.sya tathaa gauri, sc. saadhviaanushaasanik.jaleshvara, the fourth of the aadityas mitraa yo putra...agastya syartvija sapta pashcimaam disham aasthitaa, i.e. dridheyu, etc.utathya. robbed bhadraa, the daughter of soma and the wife of utathya, but was forced to give her backshivaidentified with shivaaanushaa sanik.saha gauryaa mitraa yo putra...agastyamunjavatworships shiva on munjavatgurushish yasamv.ambhasaam...raajaaanugitaap.mitrena o yathaa, sc. guptamausalap.raajaa, in the ocean, received the naaga who issued from balaraamamahaaprasthaanikap.the gaandiva had been owned by . and was given back to himsvargaarohanap.sya lokaanthe lord of the waterssahaa mitraabhyaam yathen drayathaa mitrausuraambu preta vittaanaam patinin the comp. pitrivittaambu deveshaan, only c.page7 b lord of the watersyaaanavritalord of aquatic animals
varuna2, a gandharva .
varuna3, a serpent .
varunaa, a river .
vaaruna1, a tirtha .
vaaruna4, mostly pl. . b, .
vaaruna5, adj. . b, . d, . e, . b, . u, . b, . b, . g, . b, . b, . b, .
varunashrotasa, a mountain .
. . the sabhaa of varuna has been built by vishvakarman in the water it is of pure white, and in dimensions similar to those of yamas. there varuna is sitting with vaaruni worshipped by the aadityas, naagas, daityas, and daanavas likewise the four oceans the rivers, lakes, etc in their corporeal forms the aquatic animals, troops of gandharvas and apsarases, and sunaabha, the minister of varuna he is surrounded by his sons and grand sons, and go, and pushkara .
varunasrotasa, v. varunashrotasa.
varunaastra . b, . vaaruna, adj.
vaaruni1, a vainateya .
vaaruni, a goddess . suraa.
vaarunya, adj. .
varuthini, an apsaras .
vasaa, a river .
vasaati1, son of the elder janamejaya .
vasaati or vashaati, pl a people .
vasaatika, pl. = vasaati, pl .
vasaatiya, pl. = vasaati, pl .
vaasaatya, pl. = vasaati, pl .
vaasava, adj. .
vaasava, adj. .
vaasava, pl. .
vasishtha, a rishi, son of varuna, one of the saptarshis, husband of arundhati, father of shakti and grandfather of paraashara. . b, . i, . n, . p, . y, . g, . b, . b, . c, . b, hairanya garbhaat, cursed hiranyakashipusya suta shaktrimaanasam...pitaamahasyakula nandana, i.e. vyaasaaanushaasanik.sya...hatam putrashatam, sc. by vishvaamitrasalile puraatmaanam majjayan, all. to sya samvaadam brahmanash ca, s also c.s also c discourse between . and brahmaanupamanyus tvam rishinaam, sc. asi, sc. shivaaanushaasanik.caturthas tvam sya, sc. vyaasaamong the rishis who came to see bhishmathe purohita of saudaasainstructed saudaasa about gifts of kinedevarshimsuvarnotpattirelated the suvarnotpattitaarakavadhop.related the taaraka vadhopaakhyaanaaanushaasanik.bisastainyop.s also c etymologyshapathavidhiaanushaa sanik.sapta...rishaya...pramukhaaonly b.rantideva made gifts to .avarshati ca parjanye sarvabhutaani devaraat o jivayaam aasakakshasena made gifts to .mitrasaha i.e. kalmaashapaada gave his wife madayanti to . among the seven dhaneshvarasya gurava in the north pavanaarjunasamv.khalino bhavat, krishna vaasudevaarose from the seed of the gods, which fell into a jar.aanushaa sanik.among the rishis of the northashvamedhikap.restored indra to senses with the rathantara saaman, cf braahmanagitaasapta saptarshaya siddhaa pramukhai saha, read pramukhaas tathaaguru shishyasamv.page7 b the husband of arundhatiq.v.q.v.the son of hiranyagarbha the son of mitra and varunathe son of varuna
vaasishtha2, name of a tirtha . vaasishthi.
vaasishtha3, name of a fire .
vaasishtha4, pl. .
vaasishtha, adj. .
vaasishtha . . arjuna wished to hear about vasishtha. the gandharva said vasishtha is brahmaans spiritual son and arundhatis husband kaama and krodha, who cannot be vanquished even by the immortals, used to shampoo his feet. though his wrath was excited by vishvaamitras offence, he did not yet exterminate the kushikas. afflicted at the loss of his sons, he did not any dreadful deed for the destruction of vishvaamitra. he did not transgress kritaanta in order to bring back his lost children from the abode of yama. it was by obtaining him that the ikshvaakus acquired this earth, and with him as their purohita, they performed many great sacrifices. therefore acquire a fit purohita . arjuna wished to hear of the hostility between vishvaamitra and vasishtha. the gandharva said this old story of vasishtha they tell in all worlds. in kaanyakubja king gaadhi, son of kushika, had a son vishvaamitra, who, with his ministers, used to go a hunting. once he arrived at the hermitage of vasishtha, who offered him arghya, etc. from his cow nandini, who yielded everything desired vishvaamitra asked vasishtha to give him nandini for an arbuda of kine or his king, but in vain. then he wanted to take the cow by force. she repaired to vasishtha, who at first did nothing, saying, am a forgiving brahman but at last he said not aban you stay if you can hearing this word, the cow attacked vishvaamitras troops from her tail she began to rain showers of burning coals from her tail she brought forth pahlavas, from her udders draavidas and shakas, from her womb yavanas, from her dung shabaras, from her urine kaancis, and from her sides sharabhas, and from the froth of her mouth paundras, kiraatas, yavanas, simhalas, barbaras, vashas, civukas, pulindas, cinas, hunas, keralas, and other mlecchas, who attacked vishvaamitras soldiers. vishvaamitras troops fied, but none was deprived of life. vishvaamitra then, disgusted with kshatriya prowess, set his mind on asceticism, and finally became a brahman and drank soma with indra . kalmaashapaada . vasishtha patiently bore his grief, and resolved rather to sacrifice his own life than exterminate the kaushikas. he threw himself n from the summit of meru, entered a huge fire in the forest, and tied a strong weight to his neck and threw himself into the sea, but all in vain, and, in distress of heart, he returned to his hermitage . beholding it bereft of his children, he left it again and tied himself strongly with cords and flung himself into a mighty river, but the stream cut those cords and cast the rishi ashore, whence that river was called vipaashaa. once more he threw himself into a river flowing from himavat, but the river immediately fled in different directions, and has since been known by the name of the shatadru . he now again went towards his hermitage, and was on the way addressed by adrishyanti, the wife of shaktri, who had for twelve years borne his child in her womb. hearing that child in the womb reciting the vedas with the six angas, vasishtha refrained from self destruction, and, accompanied by adrishyanti, returned to his hermitage. one day he saw kalmaashapaada, who would devour him adrishyanti was terrified, but vasishtha restrained him by uttering hum, and, sprinkling him with water sanctified by mantras, and freed him from his curse that had lasted twelve years. kalmaashapaada promised never more to insult brahmans, and prevailed upon vasishtha that he accompanied him to his capital ayodhyaa and begat a son for him on the queen. then he went back to his hermitage. after twelve years the queen tore open her womb by a stone, and then was born the raajarshi ashmaka, who founded the city of paudanya . paraashara .
vasishthaapavaaha, name of a tirtha . p a great enmity arose between vishvaamitra and vasishtha, due to their rivalry in respect of ascetic austerities. the hermitage of vasishtha was in sthaanutirtha, on the bank of the sarasvati on the opposite bank was the hermitage of vishvaamitra. there sthaanu had practised penances, and having performed a sacrifice and worshipped the sarasvati he had established that tirtha, and there the gods in days of yore installed skanda. in that tirtha on the sarasvati, the rishi vishvaamitra, by his penances, disturbed vasishtha. vishvaamitra and vasishtha every day challenged each other in respect of the superiority of their penances. vishvaamitra ordered the sarasvati, notwithstanding her trembling, to bring vasishtha into his presence, that he might slay him. vasishtha willingly let her so, lest vishvaamitra should curse her. sarasvati washed away one of her banks and bore vasishtha away and informed kaushika about his arrival but while vishvaamitra was looking for a weapon she quickly bore vasishtha back to the eastern bank. vishvaamitra cursed her, saying that her current should be changed into blood, which is acceptable only to the raakshasas. for a whole year she then flowed bearing blood mixed with water. the gods, the gandharvas, and the apsarases grieved. for this reason the tirtha came to be called . sarasvati, however, once more got back her own proper condition, when some munis on a tirthayaatraa to the sarasvati, having bathed in all her tirthas came to . and saw the water mixed with blood, and that innumerable raakshasas were drinking it. having learnt the cause, they worshipped mahaadeva with penances and purified the sarasvati. the raakshasas, who were brahma raakshasas, afflicted with hunger, sought the protection of the munis, who, having ordained what should be the food of the raakshasas solicited the sarasvati, who assumed a new shape called arunaa bathing in that new river the raakshasas abaned their bodies and went to heaven. ascertaining all this, indra bathed there and became purified of a grievous sin, .
vaasishthi, a tirtha .
. . arjuna asked why did kalmaashapaada command his queen to go to vasishtha and was this an act of sin on the part of vasishtha the gandharva said under the influence of the curse, kalmaashapaada, in anger, went out of his capital, accompanied by his wife. in a solitary part of the woods he saw a brahman and his wife embracing each other. the couple ran away, but kalmaashapaada forcibly seized the brahman. the braahmani asked him to liberate her husband, but he cruelly devoured him. the tears that the woman shed blazed up like fire and consumed everything in that place. the braahmani cursed the raajarshi, saying that he should meet with instant death when cohabit ing with his wife, and that his wife should have a son from vasishtha, whose children he had devoured, and that child should be the propagator of his race. then she entered the fire. vasishtha, by his ascetic power, immediately knew all about it. and long after this, when the raajarshi became freed from his curse, he approached his wife madayanti, not remembering the curse of the braahmani. hearing, however, the words of his wife, he recollected the curse, and, therefore, he appointed vasishtha to beget a son on his queen .
vasor dhaaraa, name of a tirtha . do. = the river mandaakini, . do name of a certain libation of ghee, .
vastrapa, pl a people .
vaastu, a river .
vasu1, surnamed uparicara, king of the cedis. . instructed by indra king . won the king of the cedis. some time after he dwelled in a hermitage practising austerities, from which the gods, headed by indra, prevailed upon him to refrain. indra gave him a crystal vimaana capable of carrying him through the air like a god, and a triumphal garland named indramaalaa, and a bamboo pole to protect the peaceful. after a year the king planted this pole in the ground in order to worship indra . indra came there in the form of a swan to accept the worship, and blessed the men and kings who would observe this festivity, . from the country of the cedis . ruled the whole world. he installed his five sons as governors of various provinces brihadratha, pratyagra, kushaamba or manivaahana, maavella, and yadu they founded kings and towns, named after themselves, and created separate dynasties which lasted for long ages, . seated in his crystal chariot and coursing through the sky . was aed by gandharvas and apsarases, and was called uparicara. near his capital flowed the river shuktimati, and from love of this river the mountain kolaahala once barred its course. . then kicked the mountain with his foot, and the river gave him the two children which she had with kolaahala. . made the male child the commander of his armies, and made the daughter girikaa his wife, . c, . cedipa, cedipati, pauravanandana, raajoparicara, uparicara.
vasu2, a prince, brother of dushyanta .
vasu3, a brahman, father of paila .
vasu4, son of jamadagni .
vasu5, a king .
vasu6, a rishi .
vasu8, mostly pl a class of gods . paitaamaha manu was father of prajaapati, whose sons were the eight vasus
vasucandra, a paandava warrior .
vasushri, a maatri. u, .
vasudaa, a maatri. u, .
vasudaamaa, a maatri. u, .
vasudaana, king of paamshuraashtra . paamshuraashtraadhipa.
vasudeva, son of shura, husband of devaki, etc father of krishna, etc . e, . b, . also the following synonyms aanakadundubhi, . shauri, shuraputra, shurasunu, shurasuta, shuraatmaja, q.v. yadudvaha, q.v.
vaasudeva3, king of the pundras . paundraka, pundraadhipa.
vasudharman, a kuru warrior, a trigarta .
vasuhoma, an anga king .
vaasuki, king of the serpents . . held a consultation with his brothers how to render the curse of kadru abortive several means were proposed and rejected elaapatra then told that he had heard brahmaan say to the gods that the harmless serpents would be saved by aastika, who should be begotten by jaratkaaru on .s sister jaratkaaru . . carefully brought up his sister. after the churning of the ocean . addressed brahmaan, who confirmed the words of elaapatra. . gave order to watch the rishi jaratkaaru, . . c, . d, อด, . g, . u, . b, . naagaraaj, naagaraaja, naagendra, pannaga, pannagaraaja, pannagaraajan, pannageshvara, pannagendra, sarparaaja, sarparaajan.
vasumanas1, an ancient king, son of haryashva and maadhavi and grandson of yayaati . vasumat, kausalya3.
vasumat2, a king at the time of yudhishthira .
vasumat3, a rite .
vasumat4, a fire, v. dasyumat .
vasumat5, a king, son of janaka .
vasumitra, a king .
vasunandini, the wife of the vasu dyaus .
vasuprada1, a warrior of skanda. u, .
vasvaukasaaraa or vasvokasaaraa, a river . f, .
vasvokasaaraa, the abode of kubera .
vata, a companion of skanda. u, .
vaatadhaana2, the country of the vaatadhaanas .
vaatadhaana, pl a people .
vaataadhipa, a king .
vaataghna, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
vaataja, pl a people br. suggests vaatajaama rathoragaa
vaatapati, a vrishni prince .
vaataapi or vaataapin, an asura, younger brother of ilvala . . asura, daitya, ditinandana, praahraadi.
vaataskandha, a rishi .
vaatavega1, son of dhritaraashtra อด, .
vaatavega2, a suparna, son of garuda .
vaataayana, pl a people .
vaatika, a warrior of skanda. u, .
vaatika, pl .
vaatikakhanda, name of a place .
vatsa1, a prince, son of the kaashi king pratardana. b, .
vatsa2, a prince, the ancestor of the vatsas. b, .
vatsa, pl a people . vaatsya, pl.
vatsala1, a warrior of skanda. u, . do. = vishnu .
vaatsya, name of one or more brahmans .
vaayava, adj. . u, .
vaayavya, adj. . d, .
vaayavyaastra . vaayavya, adj.
vaayu1, the god of the wind . b, . b, . c, . d, . u, . b, . b, learnt the religion of naaraayana from the rishi sunarna and communicated it to the rishisaanushaa sanik.suvarnotpattibrahma vagni somaanaam saalokyamaanushaasanik.o, sc. lokampavanaarjunasamv.devadutadiscourse between . and arjuna kaartaviryakrishna vaasudevakrishna identified with shivashivashiva identified with .aanushaasanik.svargaarohanap.murtimatathe friend of anala one of the vasus, husband of shivaaagni identified with a.pritir asyaa gninaa yathaao vaa vahed merumagny anilendu bhaanavamano mramhasaafather of bhimasenafather of bhimasenanaavam...mano mgaaminimtaarkshya mramhasa bhimasyapratimair gatauv. draupadeya, pl.mano mramhasa, sc. turangamaanmano mramhasa, sc. rathaavavauagni mauagni msamyogaatagni m toyebhyaagni mtoyaanaamagni mauagni mauagni mauaakritiaatmaaagny ashvi maayamasya ya purasaraantakamano mramhasamaad urdhvamvegavaancandraarka maaoshanam, adj. sc. lokampraahaavani maudvitiyam...bhutamvaa dadau putram bhimam, sc. to paandupaartham aatmajam ma, i.e. bhimasenaarjuna had obtained the vaayavya weapon from m.eva paavakam, sc. santejayanhusband of sukanyaa and father of mankanakapururavasa ailasya samvaadam masankaasham maasamam maasadharmaa maidentified with krishnagaruda identified with p.sya niveshanam, in the west pavataam asmi, says krishnasya samvaadam arjunasya caamong the fathers of the paandavasenaatha samo balena ssyaiva suta, i.e. bhimasenafather of bhimasenaena kuntyaam...sujaata, sc. bhimasenaarjuna obtained weapons from . rasaaharau, created by paancajanya from his mouthjave bale ca sadrisham arunaanuja yo
vaayubala, son of mankanaka. j, .
vaayucakra, son of mankanaka. j, .
vaayuhan, son of mankanaka. j, .
vaayujvaala, son of mankanaka. j, .
vaayumandala, son of mankanaka. j, .
vaayuretas, son of mankanaka. j, .
vaayuvega1, a prince .
vaayuvega2, a son of dhritaraashtra . vaatavega.
vaayuvega3, son of mankanaka. j, .
veda, a brahman . . served his master with hard work a very long time uncomplainingly. he got himself three pupils, and never told them to perform any work, that they might not experience such woe as he had himself experienced from his preceptor. he was appointed upaadhyaaya by the kings janamejaya and paushya, .
veda, mostly pl the sacred knowledge, esp the vedic literature, .
vedashiras, a rishi. c, .
vedaashvaa, a river .
vedaanga, pl . anga1.
vedaanga2, sg. = surya, . do. = vishnu .
vedaanta, mostly pl a kind of literary works, probably identical with the upanishads, . do sg. = durgaa, .
vedasmritaa, a river . next.
vedasmriti, a river . the prec.
vedavati, a river .
vedi, a tirtha . do the wife of brahmaan, .
vedi prajaapate, a tirtha .
veditirtha, a tirtha .
vegavat1, a serpent .
vegavat2, one or more asuras .
vegavat3, a raakshasa .
vena, one or more ancient princes .
venaa, a river .
venaatata, pl a people .
venavin, see vainavin.
venika, pl a people .
venikaa, see sitaa.
venin, a serpent .
veniskandha, a serpent .
venudaarisuta, a prince .
venujangha, a muni .
venumandala, a varsha on kushadvipa .
venupa, pl a people .
venuvinaadhaaraa, a maatri. u, .
venvaa, venyaa, v. venaa.
vetaalajanani, a maatri. u, .
vetasaka, pl name of a place .
vetasikaa, a tirtha .
vetrakiyagriha, name of the residence of a certain king .
vetrakiyavana, name of a forest . prec.
vetravati, a river .
vetrika, pl a people .
vibhaanda, a rishi .
vibhaandaka, a rishi, father of rishyashringa . kaashyapa.
vibhaavasu1, a rishi, brother of supratika .
vibhaavasu2, a rishi .
vibhishana1, a yaksha .
vibhishana2, a raakshasa prince, brother of kubera and raavana . paulastya.
vibhishanaa, a maatri. u, .
vibhitaka, the tree terminalia bellerica, foll .
vibhu1, a prince, son of the kaashi king . abhibhu.
vibhu2, the sixth son of bhrigu. b, . varenya2.
vibhurasi, name of a fire .
vibhuti, son of vishvaamitra. b, .
vibudhadvish, pl. = asura, pl .
vibudhavidvish, pl. = vibudhadvish, pl .
vicakhnu or vicakhyu, a king .
vicitra, a king .
vicitravirya, a king, son of shaantanu and satyavati . kaurava, kauravya, kurukulodvaha.
. . satyavati related to bhishma the birth of dvaipaayana, who instantly came when kaali thought of him, and promised to raise offspring in the wis of vicitravirya. as there was no time for them to observe a rigid vow for one full year, he ordered that they should tolerate his ugliness. satyavati first addressed herself to kausalyaa and fed brahmans, devarshis, and guests . ambikaa, seeing vyaasa, closed her eyes in fear therefore her son, though he was destined to be mighty, etc and to have sons, had to be blind. after his birth, vyaasa approached ambaalikaa, who became pale with fear therefore, her son was pale and was named paandu. ambaalikaa refused to receive vyaasa again and sent him a shudra maid of hers, aned with her own ornaments on her he begat vidura, who was dharma, born under the curse of maandavya. vyaasa then disappeared .
. . when vicitravirya had come of age, bhishma went to vaaraanasi to the svayamvara of the three daughters of the king of kaashi, and, in order to marry them to vicitravirya, he carried them off with force to haastinapura . the eldest, ambaa, he let free before the wedding, as she declared that she, in her heart, had chosen the saubha king, and had been chosen by him. ambikaa and ambaalikaa he bestowed on vicitravirya. after seven years vicitravirya died of con sumption .
vishaakha1, a god, a son or form of skanda. b, . u, .
vishaakhaa, name of a nakshatra, v. su. si .
vishaakhayupa, name of a sacred place .
vishaalaa, wife of ajamidha .
vishaalaa, name of one or more rivers. i, . t by bathing in . in karavirapura and offering oblations of water to the pitris, and by bathing in devahrada one becomes identified with braahman, .
vishaalaka, a yaksha .
vishaalaaksha1, a son of dhritaraashtra .
vishaalaaksha2, a matsya warrior .
vishaalaaksha3, a suparna, son of garuda .
vishaalaaksha5, v. vaishaalaaksha.
vishaalaakshi, a maatri. u, .
vishalyaa, a river .
vishalyaa, name of a certain medicinal plant, .
vishiraa, v. vasudaa.
vishoka1, the charioteer of bhimasena .
vishoka2, a kaikeya prince .
vishokaa, a maatri. u, .
vishoshana, a celestial weapon .
vishundi, a serpent .
vishva1, a prince .
vishvaa, daughter of daksha and wife of kashyapa .
vishvabhuj1, name of one of the five indras .
vishvabhuj2, name of a fire .
vishvaaci, an apsaras .
vishvadamshtra, an asura. b, .
vishvadeva, pl. = vishve devaa, .
vishvagashva1, v. vishvagashva.
vishvajit1, a fire .
vishvajit2, an asura. b, .
vishvakarman, the celestial artificer, sometimes identified with brahmaan or tvashtri . c, . b, . b, bhaumana, prajaapati, vishva, vishvakrit.
vishvakrit6, a vishvadeva .
vishvaksena, v. vishvaksena.
vishvaamitra, a rishi, son of gaadhi bis . . had deprived vasishtha of his children though born as a kshatriya he became a brahman through his penances, and created the river kaushiki for his ablutions there, his wife, during a famine, was maintained by the raajarshi matanga, who was living as a hunter therefore, when the famine was over, . changed the name of the river into paaraa and performed a sacrifice for matanga, and indra himself, from fear, came there to drink soma. in anger, created another world and a series of nakshatras, beginning with pratishravana, and gave pro tection to trishanku, who was cursed by his guru he could burn the three worlds by his splenr, and by a kick cause the earth to quake he could sever meru, and hurl it away at any distance he could go round the earth in a moment, and yama, soma, the maharshis, the saadhyas, the vishvas, and the vaalakhilyas are afraid of his prowess. to him indra sent the apsaras menakaa, who, assisted by vaaya and manmatha, disturbed his penances . . begat on menakaa a daughter, whom she abaned on the banks of the maalini in the valleys of himavat. vultures protected the child from raakshasas and carnivorous animals, until she was found and reared by kanva, who called her shakuntalaa, because she had been protected by the birds, . c, . n the great kshatriya gaadhi kaushika became a great ascetic having resolved to give up his body, he installed his son vishvaamitra on the throne, notwithstanding the solicitations of his subjects, and went to heaven. however, could not protect the earth even with his best exertions. he then heard of a great fear of raakshasas, and went out with his army. in the hermitage of vasishtha his troops caused much mischief when the brahman vasishtha came to his hermitage, he became angry and commanded his cow to create many terrible shabaras, who, encountering the army of caused a great carnage, and the troops fied away. . then set his heart on ascetic austerities, and in this tirtha of the sarasvati he began to emaciate his own body, although the gods repeatedly attempted to interrupt him. brahmaan granted him the boon that he should become a brahman. then he wandered over the whole earth like a celestial, . p, . . b, aanushaasanik.became a brahman, etc.v. shunashephaenumeration of the feats of .vishvaamitrop.read brahmarshim brahmavaadinambraahmanataam yaata, the wife of gaadhi bore a son who afterwards became a brahman and founder of a race of brahmansaatmajaa, enumeration of the sons of .aanushaasanik.had, by the grace of shiva, become a brahmanpreceptor of gaalavaamong the rishis who came to see bhishmaena ca puraa braahmanyam praaptamcyavana kushikasamv kshatriyam viprakarmaanam...gaadhe putramjanma...muner sya, all. to bbisa stainyop.etymologyshapathavidhiaanushaasanik.became a brahman by confining himself to one meal a day during, celestial yearskaushika, one of the seven dhaneshvarasya guravaone of the rishis of the northanugitaap.aadayo nripaaattained to high successmausalap.cursed shaamba, etc.
vishvaamitraa, a river .
b . bhishma said king ajamidha king jahnu sindhudvipa r ri balaakaashva vallabha kushika gaadhi, who, being childless and desiring to have a son, repaired to the forest, where the beautiful satyavati was born to him. cyavanas son, ricika bhaargava, asked for her hand but as he was poor, gaadhi required of him as a er, white horses having one black ear, which he obtained from varuna . ricika granted her a boon, that she should have a son she related this to her mother, who prevailed upon her to obtain a son also for her having promised them both a son, he told the mother to embrace an ashvattha tree and satyavati an udumbara tree, and each of them to eat a certain caru, consecrated with hymns. the mother exchanged both the trees and the carus. ricika had placed the entire brahman energy in satyavatis caru and the kshatriya energy in that of her mother therefore, thy mother will give birth to an excellent brahman and thou to a terrible kshatriya. satyavati prevailed upon him, that not her son, but her sons son should be such. then, by the favour of ricika, she gave birth to jamadagni, and the wife of gaadhi to the brahmarshi vishvaamitra, versed in the vedas . vishvaamitra attained to the state of a brahman, and became the founder of a race of brahmans. madhucchanda, etc were all sons of vishvaamitra .
vishvapati, name of a fire .
vishvaruci, a gandharva .
vishvarupa1, an asura .
vishvarupa2, son of tvashtri . b, tvaashtra purohita devaanaammaataramtvaashtro as trishiraa devaanaam purohita the son of tvashtri and an asura woman, was the purohita of the gods, but afterwards he joined the asuras and was then slain by indra with the thunderbolt, samvartta maruttiyasya nihantaa, i.e. indra
vishvasena, a gandharva. b, .
vishvaavasu, a gandharva king . b, v. . d, . b, . b, . b, . b, . e, . gandharva, gandharvaraaja, gandharvendra, kaashyapa.
vishvaavasu2, son of jamadagni .
. . jataayu attacked raavana, who cut off his wings. raavana entered lankaa with sitaa. jataayu indicated to raama and lakshmana that raavana had gone towards the south, and then he died. raama caused his funeral obsequies to be duly performed. raama and lakshmana killed a raakshasa named kabandha, from whose body there came out a celestial person, viz. the gandharva prince vishvaavasu, who had been cursed by a brahman he directed them to sugriva, who dwelled at the lake pampaa, near the mountain rishyamuka, with his four counsellors then he disappeared .
vishvaayu, a vishvadeva .
vishve, pl. . b, อด, . u, . ee, . gg, . b, . b, . b, . g, . b, . b, . b, . d, . f, . b, vishvadeva, pl vishvedeva, pl.
vishveshvarasthaana, a tirtha, sacred to vishveshvara .
vishvedeva, pl. = vishve . bis, . u, .
vishvopaakhyaana, v. shvetopaakhyaana.
vidanda, a prince .
vidabha, pl a people .
vidarbha, pl a people . dashi vidarbha, pl.
vidarbhaa, the metropolis of the vidarbhas . kundina.
vidarbhapati =, .
vidarbharaaj =, .
vidarbharaaja1 =, .
vidarbharaaja2, the father of lopaamudraa .
vidarbharaaja3, a prince .
vidarbhatanayaa =, .
videha, pl a people . b, .
videha, sg. .
videharaaja1, a prince at the time of yudhishthira .
vidhaatri . u, . b, . b, . d, . g, .
vidishaa, a river .
vidulaa, a princess, mother of sanjaya, the sauvira king .
vidulaaputrashaasana . the princess vidulaa one day rebuked her son sanjaya, who, being defeated by the king of the sindhus, was lying dejected. without wrath, as thou art, thou canst not be counted as a man...it is better to blaze up for a moment than to smoke for a long time...he who has not achieved a great feat, forming the subject of mens conversation, only increases the number of men he is neither man nor woman ...it behoves thee not to at the idle, wretched, infamous, and miserable profession of mendicancy that is worthy only of a coward...he is a man who cherishes wrath and s not forgive......the followers of the sindhu king are all discontented and waiting for the distress of their master others will come to thee with their auxiliaries if they behold thee put forth thy prowess... while thou wert a child, a brahman said this one, falling into great distress, will again win greatness. shambara has said there is not a more miserable state than that in which one s not see how to procure his food from day to day. by slaying vritra, indra became mahendra, and obtained the soma cup of mahendra, and the lordship of all the worlds...sovereignty is either the r of heaven or amrita... in the possession of wealth, rejoice, as before, with the sauvira maidens, and be not ruled over by the saindhava maidens...handed n by tradition from time immemorial, the eternal essence of kshatriya virtues has been ordained by prajaapati himself... a kshatriya should rather break than yield. he should bow n to brahmans only and to virtue he should rule over all other orders, destroying all evil rs . the son complained that the heart of his mother was made of steel, and blamed the kshatriya practices. vidulaa said that if sanjaya was about to be stained by infamy and she did not say it to him, her affection for him would be like that of a she ass for her young. he ought to have recourse to virtue and profit ...we have many treasure houses unknown to thee...thou hast also more than one friend. despair left sanjayas heart, though he was not gifted with great intelligence. he roused himself and achieved all that his mother had pointed out. indeed, this history, named jaya, should be listened to by everyone desirous of victory, etc. .
vidura d อด, . b, . . also the following synonyms aajamidha, q.v. bhaarata, bharatarshabha, q.v. kaurava, q.v. kshattri, . kurunandana, q.v.
vidura, v. viduratha1.
. . . the news had been reported to all the monarchs that draupadi had been married to the sons of paandu, whom they had thought burnt to death. they then set out for their own inions. duryodhana became greatly depressed, and, with his brothers, etc he set out for haastinapura. vidura was filled with joy, and related the news to dhritaraashtra, who first thought that it was duryodhana who had been selected by draupadi, but was very glad on hearing that it was the paandavas. but duryo dhana and karna tried to stir him up against them . dhritaraashtra said that he was of their opinion, but did not wish to inform vidura of it therefore he had applauded the paandavas in viduras presence. duryodhana suggested several plans for getting the better of the paandavas . karna said that the plans would not succeed he recom mended to vanquish them by prowess, while their party was yet weak. dhritaraashtra summoned bhishma, drona, and vidura, and consulted with them . bhishma recom mended to give to the paandavas one half of the king . drona approved of this, and, moreover, recom mended that a messenger should be sent to drupada with gifts, and say that dhritaraashtra was very glad of the new alliance with him, and would take the paandavas to haastinapura to be installed on the throne. . karna spoke con temptuously of bhishma and drona, saying that happiness depended on destiny, and not on friends, etc mentioning the magadha king ambuvica . . vidura recommended the suggestion of bhishma and drona, and said that the paandavas were invincible, as they were assisted by raama, janaardana, saatyaki, etc. . vidura was sent by dhritaraashtra with numerous jewels, etc to drupada and the paandavas . vidura said that dhritaraashtra was highly pleased with the alliance with drupada, and asked drupada to permit the paandavas, with their mother and wife, to return to their paternal city .
. bhishma married king devakas daughter, who was by caste a paarasavi, to vidura, who begat upon her many children as excellent as himself .
viduratha1, son of kuru and shubhaangi .
viduratha2, a vrishni prince .
vidurathasuta . b, .
vidyaa, a goddess . do pl. .
vidyaadhara, pl a class of supernatural beings, .
vidyaatirtha, name of a tirtha .
vidyotaa, an apsaras. b, .
vidyudvarcas, a vishvadeva .
vidyujjihva, a raakshasa .
vidyujjihvaa, a maatri. u, .
vidyunmaalin, an asura. d, .
vidyutaa, an apsaras. b, .
vidyutaaksha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
vidyutparnaa, an apsaras .
vidyutprabha1, a daanava. e pleased with mahaadeva granted him the sovereignty of the three worlds which he enjoyed for a hundred thousand years. shiva further granted him that he should become one of his attendants and obtain a hundred millions of children, and gave him the region named kushadvipa, .
vidyutprabha2, a rishi .
vidyutprabhaa, pl name of ten apsaras .
vigaahana, a king.
vigraha, a companion of skanda. u, .
vihanga, a serpent .
vihavya, a brahman. b, .
vijaya1, an ancient king .
vijaya3, the dart of shiva .
vijaya4, name of bows. d, . c . was made by vishvakarman for indra, who, with that bow, vanquished the daityas. from indra it passed over to parashuraama, and from him to karna it is superior to the gaandiva, .
vijaya5, son of dhritaraashtra .
vijaya6 a paandava warrior .
vijaya, pl a people .
vijayaa, a dashaarha princess .
vijayaa, a madra princess .
vijayaa, the garland of krishna .
vikaashini, a maatri. u, .
vikalya, pl a people .
vikarna1, a son of dhritaraashtra . bharatarshabha, bharatasattama, dhaartaraashtra, dhritaraashtraja, duryodhanaavara, kurupravira, kuruvar dhana, dual.
vikarna2, a rishi .
vikarna, pl a people .
vikata1, son of dhritaraashtra . vikataanana.
vikata2, a warrior of skanda. u, .
vikataanana, son of dhritaraashtra . vikata.
vikrama1, a companion of skanda. u, . do. = vishnu .
vikramin1, an ancient king . do. = vishnu .
vikrita, a prajaapati. b
vikrita1. b, . do. = shiva .
vikshara1, an asura . asura.
vikshit . avikshit.
vikunja, pl a people .
vikunthana, a prince .
vimala, name of a tirtha .
vimalaa, daughter of surabhi .
vimalaashoka, name of a tirtha .
vimala saras, a tirtha .
vimalapindaka, a serpent .
vimalodaa or vimalodakaa, one of the seven sarasvatis. i, .
vimsha, son of ikshvaaku. b, .
vimocana1, a tirtha .
vimuca, a rishi .
vinaa, a river .
vinashana, a tirtha . b the gate of the king of the nishaadas where the sarasvati disappears from hatred of them, .
vinaashana, an asura . candrasya vinaashana .
vinadi, a river .
vinataa, daughter of daksha and wife of kashyapa, mother of the vainateyas, i.e. garuda, etc . . daakshaayani, sg. and dual.
vinaayaka, pl a class of demons. b, .
vinda1, an avanti prince, brother of anuvinda1 . aavantyau, vinda3.
vinda2, a kaikeya prince, brother of anuvinda2 . kaikaya, sg. and dual, kaikeya, sg. and dual.
vinda3, son of dhritaraashtra .
vindhaculaka, pl v. vindhyaculika, pl.
vindhya, name of a mountain . . once asked the sun to honour him with circumambulations as he did meru, and as the sun declared it impossible, from wrath, began to increase and obstructed the path of the sun, the moon, and the nakshatras. as the gods could not dissuade him, they applied to agastya, who, with his wife came, and, saying that he should have to go to the southern region, prevailed upon . to cease to increase until he should have returned. but to this day he has not returned from the southern region, . f, . d, . u, . d, . v, . g, .
vindhyaculika, pl a people .
vinitaatman, an ancient king .
vipaashaa, a river . k, . v, . m, . b, .
vipaapa, name of a fire .
vipaapaa, a river .
vipaapman, a vishvadeva .
vipaatha, younger brother of karna .
vipracitta, v. vipracitti.
vipracitti, an asura . b, . daiteya, daanava, daanavarshabha.
viprarshi1, pl. = brahmarshi, pl . g, .
viprarshi2, sg. = sg. unnamed viprarshis mentioned, . names of single viprarshis agastya, . akritavrana, . animaandavya, . arishtanemi, . ashtaavakra, . atri, . aurva, . bharadvaaja, . bhrigu, . cyavana, . shaktri, . sharmin, . shaunaka, . shunaka, . drona, . durvaasas, . gaalava, . gritsamada, . jaajali, . jamadagni, . kaashyapa, . kaushika6, . likhita, . mandapaala, . maarkandeya, . mudgala, . naarada, . paippalaadi, . paraashara, . pulastya, . raama jaamadagnya, . ricika, . rishabha, . samvarta, . saarasvata, . upamanyu, . uttanka, . vaishampaayana, . vasishtha, . vibhaandaka, . vishravas, . vishvaamitra, . vipula, . vyaasa, . yaajnavalkya, . yavakrita, .
viprithu1, a vrishni prince .
viprithu2, an ancient king . prithu.
vipula1, a sauvira king .
vipula2, a rishi of bhrigus race . b, . bhaargava, bhrigusattama, bhrigudvaha, bhriguttama, viprarshi.
b . bhishma said there was, in days of yore, a ri. devasharaman his beautiful wife ruci fascinated every one who saw her, both g and daa and particularly indra. devasharman knew very well the disposition of women, as well as indras coveting other mens wives. once, desirous of performing a sacrifice, he summoned his favourite disciple vipula bhaargava, and asked him, during his absence, to protect ruci against indra, describing to him the disguises that indra assumes . vipula, by his yoga power, entered the body of ruci . indra came, but ruci was unable to move or to utter a word in reply then, influenced by vipula, she answered in sanskrit words that she did not intend to utter. indra became perplexed, and when he with his spiritual eye discovered vipula within ruci, he became afraid that he might curse him. vipula left the body of ruci and returned to his own body which was lying near, and rebuked indra, mention ing gautamas curse, owing to which indras body became disfigured with, sex marks, which, owing to gautamas compassion, were afterwards changed into eyes, see that thou t not, with thy sons and counselors, meet with destruction. shakra, overwhelmed with shame, made himself invisible. a moment after, devasharman came back, and granted vipula the boon that he should never swerve away from righteousness dismissed by his preceptor, vipula left his abode and practised the most severe austerities. deva sharman also, with his spouse, began to live in the woods, perfectly fearless of indra . vipula became full of pride. after some time the occasion came for a ceremony of gifts, with respect to the sister of ruci the anga king citraratha. meanwhile, a celestial damsel dropped some flowers n to the earth they were picked up by ruci, who, aned with them, went to the palace of the anga king. her sister, prabhaavati, the anga queen, urged her to obtain some for her, and ruci informed her husband, who, summoning vipula, commanded him to bring him some flowers of the same kind. vipula found some such flowers still lying scattered, quite fresh, and set out for campaa on his way he saw a human couple moving in a circle, hand in hand a dispute arose between them, and at last, each of them took the oath that one of us who speaks falsely shall, in the next world, meet with the end which will be vipulas. vipula became very sad proceeding a little way he beheld six other men playing with dice made of gold and silver they were heard by vipula to take the same oath as the first couple. at last he recollected the manner in which he had acted in protecting his preceptors wife, without telling his preceptor the truth. coming to campaa, he gave the flowers to his preceptor . devasharman, too, knew what he had seen on his way, and how he had acted in protecting ruci he explained that the first couple were day and night, the others the six seasons. he absolved vipula and ascended to heaven with his wife and his disciple. maarkandeya had narrated this tale to bhishma on the banks of the gangaa .
vira1, an asura . v. .
vira2, a son of dhritaraashtra .
vira3, a prince .
vira4, name of a fire, .
vira5, a god .
vira6, a bhoja prince .
viraa, wife of the fire bharadvaaja .
viraa, a river .
virabaahu1, son of dhritaraashtra .
virabaahu2, a cedi king .
virabhadra1, a paandava warrior .
virabhadra2, a divine being evolved from shiva. b, .
viraashrama, a tirtha .
viradhanvan, a trigarta warrior .
viradharman, a king .
viradyumna, a king, father of bhuridyumna .
viraaj1, name of the primeval being, identified with shiva and vishnu, . do. fem. = prithivi, . do fem. = sarasvati, .
viraja1, a tirtha .
viraaja, son of avikshit .
virajas1, a serpent .
virajas2, son of dhritaraashtra .
virajas3, a spiritual son of naaraayana .
virajas4, son of kavi. b, .
viraka, pl a people .
virakaraa, v. virankaraa.
viraketu, a paancaala warrior . paancaalakulanandana, paancaalaputra, paancaalya.
virana, a prajaapati. b, prajaapatilearnt the religion of naaraayana from sanatkumaara, and taught it to raibhya
viranaka, a serpent .
virankaraa, a river .
virapramoksha, a tirtha .
virasa, a serpent .
virasena, king of the nishadhas, father of nala .
viraata, king of the matsyas, husband of sudeshnaa, father of shankha, uttara, and uttaraa . matsya, matsyapati, matsyaraaj, matsyaraaja, matsyaraajan.
viraatanripati, v. viraata.
viraataparvan, the fourth book of the mhbhr. . c, . vairaata.
viraataraaj, virataraaja, viraataraajan, v. viraata.
viraava, name of a horse .
viravati, a river .
viraavin, a son of dhritaraashtra .
virin, pl a family .
virini, wife of daksha .
virocana1, an asura . at the svayamvara of keshini, . and sudhanvan staked their lives as to who of them was superior, and referred the question to prahlaada, . b, . b, . b, . daiteya, daityendra, praahraadi.
virocana2, a son of dhritaraashtra .
virocanaa, a maatri. u, .
virohana, a serpent .
virupa1, an asura .
virupa2, b, .
virupa3, son of angiras. b, .
virupaashva, an ancient king .
virupaka, an asura. b, .
virupaaksha2, an asura .
virupaaksha3, name of several raakshasas . b, . raakshasa, raakshasaadhipa, raakshasaadhipati, raakshasendra.
virupaaksha4, a rudra .
viryavat, a vishvadeva .
viryavati, a maatri. u, .
vishaprastha, a mountain .
vishkara, v. viskara.
vishnu1, one of the aadityas, also named hari, identified with the supreme lord naaraayana, husband of lakshmi in the mhbhr. his principal incarnation is that as krishna vaasudeva . b, . . . d, . . . . . . b, . b, . . . . . b, . bis, . . . . b, . . c . is the infinite spirit, etc who, at the termina tion of a yuga in the form of the all consuming fire, burns the world and the naagalokas who dwell in the paataala, whereafter clouds appear in the sky and pour n rain that extinguishes the fire . when, at the end of, yugas, the earth becomes flooded with water, the supreme being, under the name of naaraayana, with, eyes, and, feet, and, heads, sleeps upon shesha, who has, hoods, etc enveloping all space with nocturnal gloom. and when his creative faculty in stirred he awakes and finds the world deserted etymology of the name naaraayana . when he was engaged in meditation for the re creation of the universe, a lotus came into existence from his navel, and from this the four faced brahmaan came out, who, sitting on the lotus, from his mind created the nine great rishis marici, etc who were equal to himself. they created the yakshas, raakshasas, bhutas, pishaacas, serpents, and men. in the form of brahmaan he creates, in the form of purusha he preserves, and in the form of rudra he destroys the universe, . d .s incarnations are the following a boar yojanas in length half lion, half man, when he killed the daitya king hiranyakashipu, who attacked him with his shula the son of kashyapa and aditi, in the form of a dwarf, born, years after the conception, of the hue of rain charged clouds and with bright eyes when he, accompanied by brihaspati, entered the sacrificial assembly of bali, the king of the daanavas, he, in three paces, took in the earth and gave it to indra krishna, with conchshell, discus, and mace, aned with the shrivatsa, clad in yellow silken robes, who protects arjuna, riding in the same chariot with him, . . . c, . . b, . . c, . g, . b, . c, . b, . d, . b, . b, . g, . b, . . . c, . krishna, naaraayana, and the following synonyms abhibhu, . acintya, q.v add, . acyuta, q.v. . ashvaciras, aadideva, aadikara, q.v. aditinandana, . aadityapati, q.v. aja, q.v. ajita, . amadhya, . anaadi, . anaadimadhyanidhana, . anaadhimadhyaanta, . anaadimadhyaparyanta, . anaadinidhana, . anaadya, . ananta, . aravindaaksha, asurasudana, avyakta, avyaya, q.v. bhagavat, q.v. bhutaacaarya, bhutaraaj, . cakradhara, cakragadaapaani, cakrapaani, cakraayudha, v. krishna. caturbhuja, . caturmurtidhrit, q.v. shakraanuja, . shaalagraama, shambhu, q.v. shankhacakragadaadhara, v. krishna. shipivishta, shridhara, shulavaraayudha, shveta, q.v. devashreshtha, devadeva, deva deveshvara, devaadhideva, devesha, q.v. ekashringa, q.v. govinda, v. krishna. guhya, q.v. hari, . harimedhas, havyakavyabhuj, hayashiras, hayashirodhara, hayamukha, q.v. hrishikesha, v. krishna. ishaana, ishvara, q.v. indraanuja, . indraavaraja, . jagannaatha, jagatpati, jagatprabhu, q.v. janaardana, v. krishna. jishnu, kapardin, kapila, q.v. keshava, v. krishna. kshetrajna, q.v. lokakartri, q.v. madhuhan, madhukaitabhahan, madhu nihan, madhusudana, madhunisudana, q.v. mahaabhutaadhipati, mahaadeva, mahaapu rusha, mahaavaraaha, maheshvara, q.v. mahendraavaraja, . mrnjakesha, munjakeshavat, munjakeshin, q.v. nishkriya, q.v. padmalocana, padmanaabha, q.v. paramaatman, parameshvara, parameshthin, q.v. pitavaasas, v. krishna. prabhu, prajaapati, prajaapatipati, punda rikaaksha, purusha, purushavara, purushot tama, pushkaraaksha, pushkarekshana, q.v. rathacakrabhrit, q.v. saadhya, sahasrashirasa, sahasrashirsha, sahasraaksha, sarvabhutapitaamaha, sarva bhuteshvara, sarvadevesha, sarvalokeshvara, simha, surashreshtha, suraganashreshtha, suraguru, surapati, suraarighna, suraasura guru, suravarottama, suresha, svayambhu, q.v. tribhuvanashreshtha, tribhuvaneshvara, q.v. tridashavaraavaraja, . trilokesha, trilokeshvara, trivartman, trivikrama, trivikramagati, q.v. upendra, urukrama, q.v. vaikuntha, vaamana, varada, varaaha, vaaraaha, varenya, q.v. vaasavaanantaraja, . vaasavaanuja, . vaasavaavaraja, . vibhu, vibudhashreshtha, vishva, vishvabhu, vishvabhuj, vishvagupta, vishvakarman, vishvakrit, vishvamurti, vishvapara, vishva rupa, vishvarupadhrik, vishvaatman, vishvesha, vishveshvara, viraaj, virinca, vikuntha, vishvaksena, q.v. yajnapati, yogeshvara, yogisha, yogishvara, yogin, q.v. vishnus names . the names are the following, alphabetically arranged abhipraaya, acala, acintya, acyuta, ashoka, aashrama, ashvattha, adbhuta, aadhaaranilaya, adhishthaana, adhokshaja, adhrita, aadideva, aaditya, adrishya, agraahya, agraja, agrani, ahar, aja, akrura, akshara, akshara, akshobhya, amaanin, amaraprabhu, ambhonidhi, ameyaatman, amitaashana, amitavikrama, amogha, amrita, amritaasha, amritaamshudbhava, amritapa, amritavapus, amrityu, amurti, amurtimat, anaadi, anaadi nidhana, anagha, anala, anaamaya, aananda, ananta, anantashri, anantajit, anantarupa, anantaatman, anartha, anekamurti, anisha, anila, animisha, anirdeshyavapus, aniruddha, anirvinna, anivartin, anna, annaada, antaka, anu, anukula, anuttama, apaam nidhi, aparaajita, apramatta, aprameya, aprameyaatman, apratiratha, araudra, aravindaaksha, arcishmat, arcita, arha, arka, artha, asankhyeya, asat, atindra, atindriya, aatmayoni, aatmavat, atula, aushadha, aavartana, avijnaatri, avyakta, avyaktarupa, avyanga, avyaya, ayonija, babhru, bahushiras, bhagahan, bhagavat, bhakta vatsala, bhaanu, bhaarabhrit, bhartri, bhaaskaradyuti, bhaava, bhaavana, bhayaapaha, bhayakrit, bhayanaashana, bheshaja, bhima, bhimaparaa krama, bhishaj, bhojana, bhoktri, bhraajishnu, bhu, bhushaya, bhugarbha, bhujagottama, bhuridakshina, bhushana, bhutabhaavana, bhutabhavyabhavannaatha, bhuta bhavyabhavatprabhu, bhutabhrit, bhutaadi, bhutakrit, bhutamaheshvara, bhutaatman, bhutaavaasa, bhuti, bhuvas, bija avyaya, brahmajna, brahmakrit, brahmaan, braahman, braahmana, braahmanapriya, brahmanya, brahmavid, brahmavivardhana, brahmin, brihadbhaanu, brihadrupa, brihat, cakragadaa dhara, cakrin, cala, canda naangadin, candraamshu, caanuraandhranishudana, caturasra, caturaatman, caturbaahu, caturbhaava, caturbhuja, caturdamshtra, caturgati, caturmurti, caturvedavid, caturvyuha, chinnasamshaya, shabdasaha, shabdaatiga, shashabindu, shaashvata, shaktimataam shreshtha, shama, shambhu, shankhabhrit, shaanta, shaanti, shaantida, sharabha, sharana, sharirabhrit, sharirabhutabhrit, sharman, shaarngadhanvan, sharva, sharvarikara, shaastri, shatamurti, shataanana, shataananda, shataavarta, shatrughna, shatrujit, shatrutaapana, shauri, shishira, shikhandin, shipivishta, shishtakrit, shishteshta, shiva, shokanaashana, shramana, shreshtha, shreyas, shrisha, shrida, shridhara, shrigarbha, shrikara, shrimat, shrimataam vara, shrinidhi, shrinivaasa, shripati, shrivaasa, shrivatsavakshas, shrivibhaavana, shrutisaagara, shringin, shubhaanga, shubhekshana, shuci, shucisravas, shunya, shura, shurajaneshvara, shurasena, dashaarha, daivakinandana, v. devakinandana daksha, dakshina, dama, damana, damayitri, daamodara, danda, darpada, darpahan, daaruna, deva, devabhrit, devakinandana, devesha, dhaaman, dhananjaya, dhaneshvara, dhanurdhara, dhanurveda, dhanvin, dhanya, dharaadhara, dharanidhara, dharma, dharmaadhyaksha, dharmagup, dharmakrit, dharmaviduttama, dharmayupa, dharmin, dhaatri, dhaatur uttama, dhruva, dhritaashis, dhritaatman, dhurya, disha, diptamurti, divasprish, dravinaprada, dridha, dripta, dusvapna naashana, duraadharsha, duraarihan, duratikrama, duraavaasa, durdhara, durga, durgama, durjaya, durlabha, durmarshana, dushkritihan, dyutidhara, eka, ekapad, ekaatman, gabhastinemi, gabhira, gabhiraatman, gadaadhara, gadaagraja, gahana, ganeshvara, garuda dhvaja, gatisattama, gohita, gopati, goptri, govidaam pati, govinda, graamani, guha, guhya, gunabhrit, gupta, guru, gurutama, halaayudha, hamsa, hari, havis, hemaanga, hetu, hiranyagarbha, hiranyanaabha, hrishikesha, hutabhuj, ishaana, ishvara, ishvareshvara, ijya, indrakarman, ishta, jagadaadija, jagannaatha, jagata setu, jahnu, janajanmaadi, janana, janaardana, janeshvara, janmamrityujaraatiga, jaya, jayanta, jayin, jetri, jita, jitakrodha, jitamanyu, jitaamitra, jiva, jivana, jnaanagamya, jnaana uttama, jyeshtha, jyotis, ka, kaala, kaalanemihan, kaama, kaamadeva, kaamahan, kaamakrit, kaamapaala, kaamaprada, kaamin, kanakaangadin, kaanta, kapi, kapindra, kapila, kapilaacaarya, karana, kaarana, kartri, kathita, kavi, keshava, keshihan, khandaparashu, ki, krama, kratu, krodhahan, krodhakrit, krisha, krishna, kritaagama, kritajna, kritakarman, kritaakrita, kritalakshana kritaantakrit, kriti, kshama, kshaama, kshaminaam vara, kshara, kshemakrit, kshetrajna, kshitisha, kshobhana, kumbha, kumuda, kunda, kundalin, kundara, kuvaleshaya, lakshmi, lakshmivat, lohitaaksha, lokabandhu, lokaadhyaksha, lokaadhishthaana, lokanaatha, lokasaa ranga, lokasvaamin, lokatrayaashraya, maadhava, madhu, madhusudana, mahaabala, mahaabhaaga, mahaabhoga, mahaabhuta, mahaabuddhi, mahaashakti, mahaashana, mahaashringa, mahaadeva, mahaadhana, mahaadridhrik, mahaadyuti, mahaagarta, mahaahavis, mahaahrada, mahaakarman, mahaakosha, mahaakrama, mahaakratu, mahaaksha, mahaamakha, mahaamanas, mahaamaaya, mahaamurti, mahaanidhi, maharddhi, mahaarha, maharshi, mahaasvana, mahat, mahaatapas, mahaatejas, mahaavaraaha, mahaavirya, mahaayajna, mahaayajvan, mahejya, mahendra, maheshvaasa, mahibhartri, mahidhara, mahodadhishaya, mahoraga, mahotsaaha, maanada, mangala, manohara, manojava, mantra, manu, maanya, maarga, marici, medhaja, medhas, medhaavin, medinipati, muktaanaam paramaa gati, mukunda, nahusha, naika, naikashringa, naikaja, naikakarmakrit, naikamaaya, naikarupa, naikaatman, nakshatranemi, nakshatrin, nanda, nandakin, nandana, nandi, nandin, nara, narasimhavapus, naaraayana, naya, netri, neya, nidhi, nigraha, nimisha, nirguna, nirvaana, nishthaa, nivrittaatman, niyama, niyantri, nyagrodha, nyaaya, ojas, pada anuttama, padma garbha, padmanaabha, padmani bhekshana, padmin, pana, paapanaashana, para, paramaspashta, paramaatman, parameshvara, parameshthin, pararddhi, paraayana, parigraha, parjanya, paryavasthita, pavana, paavana, pavitra, peshala, pitri, prabhava, prabhu, prabhuta, pradhaanapurusheshvara, pradyumna, pragraha, praagvamsha, prajaabhava, prajaagara, prajaapati, prakaashana, prakaashaatman, pramaana, praamshu, pramodana, praana, praanabhrit, praanada, praanajivana, praananilaya, pranava, prapitaamaha, prasannaatman, prataapana, pratardana, prathita, prathu, pratishthita, pratyaya, pritivardhana, priyakrit, priyaarha, prithu, v. prathu punarvasu, pundarikaaksha, punya, punyashravanakirtana, punya kirti, purandara, puraatana, purayitri, purna, purujit, purusattama, purusha, purushottama, pushkaraaksha, pushpahaasa, pushta, putaatman, rakshana, raama, ranapriya, rathaangapriya, ratnagarbha, ratnanaabha, ravi, ravilocana, rohita, ruciraangada, rudra, riddha, ritu, sadaamarshin, sadaayogin, sadbhuti, sadgati, saadhu, saha, sahas rajit, sahasraaksha, sahasraamshu, sahasramurdhan, sahasrapad, sahasraarcis, sahishnu, saakshin, sama, saamaga, saamagaayana, saaman, samaatman, samaavarta, samayajna, sambhava, samihana, samirana, samitinjaya, sammita, samnyaasakrit, sampratardana, samsthaana, samvartaka, samvatsara, samvrita, sanaat sanaatanatama, sandhaatri, sandhimat, sangraha, sankarshana, sanksheptri, sannivaasa, saptaidhas, saptajihva, saptavaahana, sarga, sarva, sarvashastrabhritaam vara, sarvadarshana, sarvadarshin, sarvaadi, sarvadrish, sarvaga, sarvajna, sarvakaamada, sarvalakshanalakshanya, sarvapraharanaayudha, sarvasaha, sarvaasunilaya, sarvatashcakshus, sarvatomukha, sarvavaac, sarvavid, sarvayogavinisrita, sarveshvara, sat, sataam gati, satkartri, satkirti, satkrita, satkriti, satparaayana, satpathaacaara, sattaa, sattra, sattvastha, sattvavat, saattvika, saatvataam pati, satya, satyadharman, satyadharmaparaakrama, satya dharmaparaayana, satyamedhas, satyaparaa krama, satyasandha, sava, savitri, siddha, siddhaartha, siddhasankalpa, siddhi, siddhida, siddhisaadhana, simha, skanda, skandadhara, soma, somapa, spashtaakshara, sragvin, srashtr, stavapriya, stavya, sthaanada, sthaanu, sthaavara, sthavira, sthavishtha, sthira, sthula, stotra, stotri, stuti, subhuja, sudarshana, sudhanvan, sughosha, suhrid, sukhada, sukshma, sulabha, sulocana, sumedhas, sumukha, sunda, sundara, suparna, suprasaada, suraadhyaksha, suraananda, suraarihan, suresha, sureshvara, suruci, surya, sushena, sutantu, sutapas, suvarnabindu, suvarnavarna, suvira, suvrata, suyaamuna, svaabhaavya, svadhrita, svaksha, svanga, svaanga, svaapana, svar, svasti, svastibhuj, svastida, svastidakshina, svastikrit, svaasya, svavasha, svayambhu, svayanjaata, tad, tantavardhana, taara, taarana, taru, tattva, tattvavid, tejas, tirthakara, tridashaadhyaksha, trikakud, trilokadhrik, trilokaatman, trilokesha, tripada, trisaaman, trivikrama, tushta, tvashtri, udaaradhi, udbhava, udirna, udumbara, ugra, upendra, urdhvaga, urjita, urjitashaasana, uttara, uttaarana, vaacaspati, vaagmin, vahni, vaidya, vaikhaana, vaikuntha, vaajasana, vaamana, vamshavardhana, vanamaalin, varaanga, varada, varaaroha, vardhamaana, vardhana, varuna, vaaruna, vaasavaanuja, vashatkaara, vasu, vasuda, vaasudera, vasumanas, vasuprada, vasuretas, vatsala, vatsara, vatsin, vaayu, vaayuvaahana, veda, vedaanga, vedavid, vedhas, vedya, vegavat, vibhu, vishishta, vishodhana, vishoka, vishraama, vishrutaatman, vishuddhaatman, vishva, vishvabaahu, vishvabhuj, vishvadakshina, vishvadrish, vishvakarman, vishvamurti, vishvaretas, vishvaatman, vishvayoni, vidaarana, vidhaatri, vidheyaatman, vidisha, vidvattama, vihaayasagati, vijaya, vijitaatman, vikartri, vikrama, vikramin, vikshara, vimuktaatman, vinayitri, vira, virabaahu, virahan, viraja, viraama, virocana, vishama, vishnu, vishvaksena, vistaara, vitabhaya, vivikta, vriddhaatman, vriksha, vrisha, vrishabha, vrishabhaaksha, vrishaahin, vrishaakapi, vrishakarman, vrishaakriti, vrishaparvan, vrishapriya, vrishodara, vyaadisha, vyagra, vyaala, vyaapin, vyaapta, vyaasa, vyavasaaya, vyavasthaana, yad, yadushreshtha, yajna, yajnabhrit, yajnabhuj, yajnaguhya, yajnakrit, yajnaanga, yajnaantakrit, yajnapati, yajnasaadhana, yajnavaahana, yajnin, yajvan, yama, yoga, yogavidaam netri, yogin, yogisha, yugaadikrit, yugaavarta, .
vishnu2, name of a fire . angiras6.
vishnudharman, a suparna, son of garuda .
vishnuloka . c, .
vishnupada, name of several places . b, .
vishnuparvan, a section of harivamsha .
vishvagashva1, one or more ancient kings .
vishvagashva2, a king in the time of yudhi shthira .
vishvaksena1, a rishi .
vishvaksena3, an ancient king .
viskara, an ancient king . b, .
vitabhuta, an asura .
vitahavya, a king . b, .
vitahavya, pl a tribe or family . b, . haihaya, pl.
. b . bhishma said while manu, in days of yore, was righteously ruling his subjects, he obtained a righteous son sharyaati, in whose race were born vatsas sons, the kings haihaya and taalajangha. haihaya had wives and heroic sons, who all studied the vedas and dhanurveda. in kaashi was king haryashva, the grandfather of divodaasa. the sons of king haihaya invaded kaashi and slew king haryashva in a battle between the gangaa and the yamunaa, and then went back to their own delightful city in the vatsa country. meanwhile haryashvas son sudeva was installed as kaashi king. the sons of vitahavya once more came and defeated him in battle, and then returned to their own city. after this, sudevas son divodaasa became installed as kaashi king at the command of indra he built the city of vaaraanasi between the gangaa and the southern bank of the gomati. the haihayas again attacked divodaasa he fought for, days, lost his army, left his capital, and fled away to the retreat of bharadvaaja, who was his priest, and performed a sacrifice, in consequence of which pratardana was born to him. on the same day when pratardana was born, he grew as great as a boy of years, and mastered the vedas and dhanurveda, bharadvaaja having entered into the prince and caused all the energy of the universe to enter his body . divodaasa installed pratardana as yuvaraaja and ordered him to march against the sons of vitahavya. pratardana speedily crossed the gangaa and proceeded against the city of the vitahavyas and slew them all. king vitahavya fled away to the retreat of bhrigu. pratardana followed in his footsteps and ordered bhrigu to surrender king vitahavya. bhrigu said there is no kshatriya in this retreat they who are here are all brahmans. pratardana returned home, and vitahavya became a br ri. in consequence of bhrigus statement. vitahavya gritsamada sutejas varcas vihavya vitatya satya santa ri. shravas tamas prakaasha vaagindra pramati rura shunaka shaunaka .
vitahotra, pl v. vitihotra, pl.
vitarka, son of the elder dhritaraashtra .
vitastaa, a river . b, . b, .
vitatya, a brahman, son of vihavya. b, .
viti, name of a fire .
vitihotra, an ancient king .
vitihotra, pl a people .
vittadaa, a maatri. u, .
vitula, a sauvira prince .
vivaha, name of a wind. l the fifth wind is fraught with great force and speed, and is dry, and uproots and breaks n the trees. it causes calamitous phenomena of many kinds, and produces roaring sounds in the firmament. it is known by the name of .
vivardhana, a king .
vivasvat1, one of the aadityas, identical with surya . b, . u, . b, to dvitiyajanmany andasamjnitasya maartando aan shraaddhadeva, son of aditi and born from an eggmaartandasya, father of the ashvins who came out of the nostrils of his wife sanjnaa
vivasvat2 a daitya .
vivasvat3, a vishvadeva .
vivimsha1, son of dhritaraashtra .
vivimsha2, a prince, son of vimsha. b, .
vivimshati, a son of dhritaraashtra .
vivimshu, a kuru warrior .
vivindhya, a daanava, follower of shaalva . daanava.
vivitsu, a son of dhritaraashtra . .
vomavaktra, v. somavaktra.
vrajana, son of ajamidha .
vraatya, pl. and sg .
. . dwelling in the woods, the paandavas spent eleven years in a miserable plight, yudhishthira repenting of his act of gambling, and the others thinking of revenge. once vyaasa came to them and spoke to yudhishthira about the meritoriousness of asceticism, saying that a wise man, knowing that life has its ups and ns, is neither filled with joy nor with grief, while foolish persons are reborn as beasts in after life nothing in this world is more difficult to practise than charity, and therefore charity is superior to everything even a small gift may be of great result in future life, provided that what is given away is properly acquired and, with a pure mind and in due time, bestowed on pious persons but the bestowal of ill gotten gains can never rescue the giver from evil . mudgala
vriddhasharman, a prince .
vriddhagaargya, a rishi . gaargya.
vriddhakanyaa . u the rishi kuni garga by penances created a fair daughter from his mind and then went to heaven. she worshipped the pitris and the gods with fasts and practised penances in that solitary forest not wishing to marry, as she did not see a husband worthy of her. when she could no longer move, she set her heart upon departing for the other world. naarada told her that she had no regions of blessedness to obtain, not having cleansed herself by the rite of marriage. she then went to a concourse of rishis, and said that she would give half her penances to him who would accept her hand in marriage. gaalavas son, the rishi praakshringavat, accepted her hand on condition that he should live with her only one night. on that night she became a young lady of the finest complexion, etc and gaalavas son became very happy. at morn she said he that will, with rapt attention, pass one night in this tirtha after having gratified the gods with oblations of water, shall obtain the merit of the vow of brahmacarya for years, and then she departed for heaven. he soon followed her, moved by sorrow, .
vriddhakshatra1, king of the sindhus, father of jayadratha . g . was the father of the sindhu king jayadratha, at whose birth an incorporeal voice said that he would become one of the foremost of kshatriyas, but in a battle some conspicuous kshatriya would cut off his head. the sindhu king . then summoned all his kinsmen and pronounced the curse, that he who would cause the head of jayadratha to fall to the earth, the head of that man would crack into pieces. then he installed jayadratha on the throne, and, repairing to the woods, devoted himself to ascetic austerities, . brihatkshatra3, saindhava, sindhupati. do a paurava prince, v. brihatkshatra4 .
vriddhikaa, pl a class of female ogres . the reading vrikshakaa, hopkins epic. mythol p. .
vrihaka, vrihattvan, names of gandharvas. b, .
vrijinivat, a prince. b, .
vrika1, a prince .
vrika2, a paandava warrior .
vrika3, a kuru warrior อด, .
vrika4, an ancient king .
vrika, pl a people .
vrikaratha, brother of karna .
vrikasthala, a village .
vrikodara, pl. a class of demons. u, .
vriksha, pl .
vrikshaaraka, v. vrindaaraka
vrikshavaasin, a yaksha, .
vrimhilaa, v. brimhitaa.
vrindaaraka, a son of dhritaraashtra .
vrisha2, a kuru warrior .
vrisha3, a warrior of skanda. u, .
vrisha4, an asura. b, .
vrishabha1, a mountain near girivraja .
vrishabha2, a gaandhaara prince, brother of shakuni .
vrishabhaa, a river .
vrishadamsha, a mountain .
vrishadarbha1, name of a king . b, .
vrishaadarbhi, name of a king . b, . shaibya, shibisunu.
vrishadgu, an ancient king .
vrishadhvaja1, a king .
vrishaka1, a gandhaara prince, son of subala, brother of acala and shakuni, and brother in law of dhritaraashtra, . gaandhaara, dual, gaandhaaramukhya, dual.
vrishaka2, a prince, brother of kalinga2 .
vrishakaahvayaa, a river .
vrishaakapi1, a rishi .
vrishaakapi2, one of the eleven rudras .
vrishakraatha, v. vrisha2.
vrishaamitra, a brahman .
vrishaanda, an asura. b, .
vrishaparvan1, a raajarshi .
vrishaparvan2, an asura chief . b, . asura, daitya, daanavendra.
vrishasaahvayaa, a river .
vrishasena1, an ancient king .
vrishasena2, a prince .
vrishasena3, son of karna อด, . karnaputra, karnasuta, karnaatmaja, kaarni.
vrishavarman, a kuru warrior .
vrishni, pl a people . b, . c, . d, . b, . vaarshneya, pl.
vrishni1, sg. = kritavarman, . do. = saatyaki, .
vrishnikulashreshtha =, .
vritra, an asura, slain by indra . c formerly the asura . had defeated the gods headed by indra they then applied to brahmaan, who applied to vishnu, who said that tvashtri, in days of yore, had performed ascetic penances for a million of years, and that he had created . with the permission of maheshvara you go to shiva on the mandara mountain. so they did, and shiva gave to indra his armour cased in which indra slew . u, . b, . b, . b, tvaashtrotpaaditam, the slaughter of . narrated in accordance with gautami lubdhaka vyaala mrityu kaalasamv.m hatvaa devaraatsamvartta maruttiyatridivam praag jahaaraashvamedhikap.colour and formtouchsoundmohaindrasya saha ena yuddhamanugitaap.eneva shatakrato, sc. yuddham
b . bhishma said in days of yore, indra, accom panied by the celestial forces, proceeded in his chariot, and beheld as vritra, stationed before him like a mountain, yojanas in height and in circumference. indra was struck with palsy in the lower extremities. on the eve of that great battle between . and as. there arose loud shouts from both sides, etc. vritra felt neither awe nor fear. then the encounter commenced the entire welkin was enveloped by the combatants of both sides all the gods with brahmaan, and ri si g and aps. on their chariots had assembled in order to see the battle. vritra shot rocks, the gods arrows vritra employed illusion indra was stupefied vasishtha restored him to his senses by the rathantara, pointing out to him brahmaan, etc. . indra, by yoga, dispelled the illusions of vritra. brihaspati and ri. repaired to shiva, whose energy became a fever and penetrated vritra vishnu entered the thunderbolt of indra brihaspati, vasishtha, and ri. urged indra to slay vritra, and so did shiva, saying that vritra was the soul of the universe, capable of going everywhere for, years vritra had practised penances in order to obtain strength brahmaan had given him the boons he had solicited the greatness of yogins, large powers of illusions, excess of might, etc. shiva told indra to slay him with yoga, and imparted to him his own energy. . and ri. uttered loud cheers, etc. suddenly all as. were afflicted with the loss of memory in a trice their powers of illusion also disappeared. ri. and . praised shakra and shiva . description of the symptoms that appeared on the body of vritra when he was overtaken by that fever his memory issued out of his mouth in form of a dreadful jackal. inauspicious omens. indra looked hard at him vritra yawned and uttered superhuman cries while vritra was yawning indra hurled his thunderbolt at him and slew him then indra entered heaven with that thunderbolt pervaded by vishnu. then brahmavadhyaa issued out of the body of the slain vritra. a little while after, when indra was proceeding towards heaven, she seized him and stuck to him. indra entered the fibres of a lotus stalk and dwelt there for many years. but brahmavadhyaa pursued him closely, and deprived him of all his energy. at last he repaired to brahmaan, who made her leave indra by apportioning one quarter to agni one quarter to the trees, herbs, and all kinds of grass one quarter to the apsarases and one quarter to the waters . with brahmaans permission indra then performed a horse sacrifice and thereby became cleansed, regained his prosperity, and slew thousands of foes. from the blood of vritra were born the shikhandaa, which, for this reason, must not be eaten by the twice born classes, etc. blessing upon the reciter .
vritta1, a serpent . avritta.
vritta2, v. vritra.
vrittasamvartaka, v. vritta1.
vudvudaa, v. budbudaa.
vyashva, name of two ancient kings .
vyaadhi, pl. . do. = shiva .
vyaaghra, pl. .
vyaaghradatta1, one or more paandava warriors . paancaalya.
vyaaghradatta2, a kuru warrior .
vyaaghraketu, a paanshaala prince .
vyaaghraaksha, a warrior of skanda. u, .
vyaaghrapaada, a rishi. g, .
vyaana1, one of the vital breaths . b, . b, . g, . b, . g, .
vyaasa, a rishi, the supposed compiler of mhbhr son of paraashara and satyavati, father of shuka, and, with the wives of vicitravirya, of dhritaraashtra, paandu, and vidura his proper name is krishna, and on account of his being born on an island he is called dvaipaayana and krishna dvaipaayana he arranged the vedas, . parvasangr.etat parvashatam purnam enoktam, para marshinaa etad ashtaadasham parva proktam ena aastikap jaratkaaru shishyo sya, sc. lomaharshanasarpasattraputrashishyasahaayavaan, among the sadasyas at the snake sacrifice of janamejaya, aadivamshaavataaranap.kathaa sampannaaakathayac citram aakhyaanam bhaaratam, at the snake sacrifice of janamejaya . caused his disciple vaishampaayana to recite the mhbhr.matam...syapage7 b matam...sya, aadivamshaavataaranadvipavivyaasa, etymology, c, dushyantagranthasamaashritai, sc. dvijai, paaraasharya, .k. .vidura krishna dvaipaayanaatmajak. ..dhritaraashtravivaahak..k. .paanduk. .
vyaasasthali, name of a sacred place .
vyaasavana, name of a sacred forest .
vyavasaaya1 . u, . do. = shiva . do. = vishnu .
vyaya, name of a serpent .
vyomaari, a vishvadeva .
vyuka, pl a people .
vyudhoraska, son of dhritaraashtra . next.
vyudhoru, son of dhritaraashtra .
vyushitaashva, an ancient king, descendant of puru. b there was a king named vyushitaashva, of the race of puru once, when he sacrificed, the gods, with indra and devarshis, came there, and the gods and the brahmarshis began themselves to perform a sacrifice having subdued the eastern, northern, western, and southern princes, he performed a horse sacrifice, etc. the wife of . was bhadraa kaakshivati, whom he loved so much that he was attacked by phthisis and died sonless bhadraa could not bear separation from him and cried out that he should show himself to her then his voice was heard saying that she, having bathed, should lie n with him on her bed on the night of the eighth or fourteenth day of the moon, then he would beget offspring upon her. by the corpse of her husband she gave birth to seven children three shaalvas and four madras, .
yashasvini, a maatri. u, .
yashodaa, wife of the cowherd nanda. f, .
yashodhara, son of krishna and rukmini .
yashodharaa, a trigarta princess .
yashovara, v. yashodhara.
yaadava4 vajra, .
yaadava6, adj. .
yadu1, son of yayaati and ancestor of the yadus . b, . e, . b, . daivayaaneya.
yadu2, a prince .
yaaja, a brahmarshi, brother of upayaaja. b drupada saw the two brothers of kashyapas race, y. and upayaaja. he courted upayaaja and asked him to perform a sacrifice, by which he might obtain a son who might slay drona, and promised him an arbuda of kine. but upayaaja refused. drupada once more began to pay homage to him, and after a year upayaaja said that his elder brother, y once had taken up a fruit without inquiring of the purity of the spot, and had, in the house of his preceptor, used to eat the remains of other peoples feasts he would entertain no scruples. describing the might of drona drupada promised y. to give him eight ayutas of kine. y. consented and prevailed upon upayaaja to assist him. upayaaja then spoke to drupada of everything required for the sacrifice, . kaashyapa, dual.
yaajabha, v. rishabha.
yajana, a tirtha .
yaajana, a tirtha .
yajna, . do. = shiva . do. = krishna, . do. = mahaapurusha .
yajnamush, pl a class of gods .
yajnaanga, pl. .
yajnavaaha1, a warrior of skanda. u, . do. = shiva .
yaajnavalkya, a rishi . b, .
yajurveda . b, . next.
yajus, mostly pl . yajurveda.
yakrilloma, pl a people . next.
yakrilloman, pl a people . the prec.
yaksha1, pl a class of beings, .
yaksha2, sg . names of single yakshas amogha, . macakruka, . maanivara, . sthuna, .
yaksha3, sg said of dharma assuming the form of a y .
. . the paandavas, etc returned to the hermitage of naaraayana. once yudhishthira said to them we have passed these four years in the woods it has been appointed by arjuna, that after the fifth year he will come to the mountain shveta. they then set out with the brahmans and the raakshasas, and protected by lomasha, sometimes going on foot, sometimes carried by the raakshasas, towards the north, beholding on the way the mountains mainaaka, gandhamaadana, and shveta, and on the seventeenth day they reached the slopes of himavat, not far from gandhamaadana, and were received by r. ri. vrishaparvan in his hermitage, where they passed seven nights. on the eighth day they entrusted their remaining robes, their sacrificial vessels, ornaments, and jewels to vrishaparvan, and, following his instructions, set out for the north, on foot, with dhaumya, krishnaa, and lomasha. on the fourth day they reached shveta, and entered gandhamaadana with draupadi and the brahmans, and saw the great gangaa . thereafter, they went to the hermitage of aarshtishena . aarshtishena received the four paandavas and krishna and dhaumya, and said that during the parvan days rishis living upon water and air and moving through the sky come to this mountain, sounds of kettledrums, etc being heard on the summits, and that they should not attempt to proceed further, but wait for arjuna there, as they could not go beyond kailaasa . . they passed the fifth year in the hermitage of aarshtishena, eating flesh of deer killed with unpoisoned shafts, listening to the stories told by lomasha. ghatotkaca had departed, promising to be present when occasion arose. munis and caaranas visited them. one day suparna carried off a mighty naaga from the lake, while the mountain trembled, etc and the wind, raised by suparnas wings, brought celestial flowers of five colours before the paandavas towards the river ashvarathaa. krishnaa expressed to bhima the wish of seeing the top of the mountain when he had driven away the raakshasas. bhima set out with bow, sword, and mace, and having ascended the summit, thereby gladdening kinnaras, naagas, munis, gan dharvas, and raakshasas, he blew his shell. yakshas and raakshasas assailed him with maces, clubs, etc but were killed or defeated, and the surviving fled towards the south, forsaking their weapons. the raakshasa manimat, the friend of kubera, in vain attempted to recall them, and with clubs, javelins, etc he rushed at bhima and pierced his right arm with an iron spear with a golden haft, but at last was killed by bhima with his mace. the surviving raakshasas went towards the east . . hearing various sounds and not seeing bhima, the paandavas and krishnaa, and dhaumya and the brahmans were filled with anxiety, and, entrusting draupadi to the charge of aarshtishena, they ascended the summit of the mountain and embraced bhima, who was censured and again warned by yudhishthira. kubera, on hearing about the matter from the raakshasas, in anger let yoke his carriage, and, eulogized by the gods and gandharvas, and surrounded by, yakshas, he set out through the firmament to gandhamaadana, where he seated himself on his seat pushpaka, surrounded by yakshas, raakshasas, gandharvas, and apsarases, with his noose and sword and bow, and asked yudhishthira not to be angry with bhima as bhima had only been the instrument of destiny, and said to bhima that he did not mind his act of rashness as he had thereby been delivered from the curse of agastya . kubera then gave yudhishthira some wise counsel, referring to the krita yuga he said, that yudhishthira ought to check the rashness of bhimasena they should return to the hermitage of the r. ri aarshtishena and reside there during the first dark fortnight the inhabitants of alakaa with gandharvas, and yakshas with kinnaras, etc should, at the command of kubera, protect them, and his servants procure for them meat and drink he praised arjuna . arjuna would soon join them. then kubera went to the mountain asta, followed by thousands of yakshas and raakshasas in vehicles drawn by horses flying in the air. the dead bodies of the raakshasas were, at the command of kubera, removed. the paandavas dwelt several nights there, being honoured by the raakshasas . . at sunrise, dhaumya and aarshtishena came to them, and dhaumya, seizing yudhishthiras hands, pointed out, towards the east, the mandara mountain, the east being the region of indra and vaishravana, as the south is that of yama with his abode samyamana, and the asta mountain, where the sun sets in the west, that of varuna, together with the ocean in the north meru, with the dwelling of brahmaan, where prajaapati creates all creatures, and the seven mind born sons of brahmaan, and where the seven devarshis, with vasishtha at their head, rise and set next, to the east of meru, the abode of naaraayana or vishnu, that cannot be seen by gods or daanavas, and where even brahmarshis have no access, not to speak of maharshis, but only yatis thence, they not return to this world vishnu alone shines there. description of the revolving around meru of the sun, moon, and stars . . the paandavas dwelled there for a month, visited by gandharvas and maharshis. a night and a day became to them like a year, for since the departure of arjuna, they had not felt joy. after having dwelt for five years in the abode of indra and obtained all celestial weapons from him, aagneya, vaaruna, saumya, vaayavya, vaishnava, aindra, paashuvata, braahmya, paarameshthya, and those of prajaapati, yama, dhaatri, savitri, tvashtri, and vaishravana, arjuna took leave of indra and came to gandhamaadana .
yakshi draupadi was questioned if she was a y.paandava praveshap.
yama1, lord of the spirits of the dead, son of vivasvat, often identified with dharma . d, . u, . ff, . kk, . b, . b, . b, . b, . b, . c, . b, . b, . c, . d, . f, . g, . b, . also dharma and the following synonyms dandin, devesha, kritaanta, lokapaala, q.v. pitrisha, . pitripati, . pitriraaja, . pitriraajan, . pretaadhipa, pretaraaj, pretaraaja, suresha, suryaputra, vaivasvata, q.v.
yama2, a companion of skanda. u, .
yaama, pl a class of celestial beings, mentioned together with the dhaamas . u, .
yaamadagnya v. jaamadagnya.
yamaduta, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
yamaja, dual. = nakula and sahadeva, . yama, dual.
yamaloka . asked by yudhishthira, maarkandeya said that the distance of y. from the world of men is, yojanas, the way is terrible, and people are led along it by the messengers of yama under conditions answering to their charity and fasts when alive . there is the river pushpodakaa from that river those who have given water drink clear water, while those of evil deeds have pus ordained for them, . . yaamyaloka.
yama sabhaa varnana . the sabhaa of yama vaivasvata covers an area of more than yojanas, and was built by vishvakarman it is possessed of the splenr of the sun, and yields every thing, etc. there are many raajarshis and brahmarshis, agastya, matanga, kaala, mrityu, the performers of sacrifice, siddhas, yogins, the pitris belonging to the classes agnisvaattaa, phenapaa, ushmapaa, svadhaavanta, and barhishada, the wheel of time, havyavaahana, the sinners, and those who have died during the suns southern course, those who are employed in regulating time, and the servants of yama the shimshapa, paalaasha, kaasha, kusha, and other trees and plants, many gandharvas and apsarases .
yamunaa, a river, the present jamna . b, . b, . b, . b, . m, . j, . kaalindi, kalmaashi.
yaamuna1, name of a mountain .
yaamuna2, adj. .
yaamuna3, pl a people .
yamunaatirtha2, name of a tirtha on the sarasvati. dd in the y varuna, the son of aditi, had in days of yore, performed the raajasuya sacrifice having subjugated both men and celestials and g. and raa. in battle, he per formed a great sacrifice in that tirtha during that sacrifice a terrible battle ensued between the gods and the daanavas after the completion of the raajasuya a terrible battle ensued among the kshatriyas, .
yaamya, adj. . b, . u, . ff, .
the of the minor parvans of mhbhr. . after the night had passed away, all the princes and chiefs, bhishma, etc. entered the court hall to hear the message of sanjaya, who had come back from the paandavas by the aid of saindhava steeds. sanjaya related the salutations of the paandavas . sanjaya related that arjuna had said, with yudhishthiras sanction, that sanjaya should say to duryodhana and karna, threatening them with bhimasena, etc that if the dhaartaraashtras desired war, then all the aims of the paandavas were accom plished, as duryodhana should lie n on the bare earth, deprived of life, etc. arjuna trusted himself and krishna he said that duryodhana often thought of imprisoning krishna, and sought to create a sudden disunion between krishna and arjuna. there are with us many aged brahmans, versed in various sciences...who are pro phesying the great destruction of the kurus and the srinjayas, and the ultimate victory of the paandavas... thy bow gaandiva yawns without being handled, etc. on the top of my flagstaff are heard terrific voices innumerable jackals howl at night, and raakshasas frequently alight from the sky... will use the sthunaakarna, paashupata, and braahma weapons, and all those that shakra gave me. . bhishma said to duryodhana that nara and naaraayana were arjuna and krishna it was with their aid that shakra vanquished the daityas and daanavas nara slew hundreds and thousands of paulomas and kaalakanjas in battle arjuna, with an arrow, severed the head of the asura jambha while the latter was about to swallow him he afflicted hiranyapura on the other side of the ocean, having vanquished in battle, of nivaatakavacas and in the same way also naaraayana has, in this world, destroyed numberless other daityas and daanavas. karna boasted that he would slay all the paandavas in battle, but was rebuked by bhishma, saying that karna had seen his own brother slain by arjuna in the city of viraata, and alluding to the contents of the goharana, and the ghoshayaatraaparvan. drona also counselled peace, but got no answer from dhritaraashtra . at the request of dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related that the pancaalas, etc. looked up to yudhishthira. as he was questioned about dhrishtadyumna and the somakas, he first fell n in a swoon. then, regarding bhimasena he mentioned the lac house, etc. regarding arjuna, the burning of the khaandava forest, etc. then nakula and sahadeva shikhandin the five kekaya princes, etc. . dhritaraashtra was most afraid of bhima, with his mace, mentioning his killing jaraasandha . dhritaraashtra was also afraid of arjuna, who he feared would conquer karna, and drona thirty three years have passed since the burning of the khaandava forest we have never heard of his being defeated any where . dhritaraashtra was afraid of the allies of yudhishthira the paancaalas, kekayas, etc. . sanjaya rebuked dhritaraashtra for his behaviour towards the paandavas the matsyas, etc. all decline to pay thee homage now . duryodhana said, that when the paandavas had been exiled, there came to them krishna, etc all assembled in a place not far from indraprastha, and suggested to yudhishthira that he should take back the king the people of the realm were all annoyed with us, and all our friends also were angry with us but bhishma, kripa, and ashvatthaaman had despised the foes . now the paandavas are without allies and all these kings can, for my sake, enter the fire or the sea...having given up all hopes of a town, yudhishthira craves only five villages...there is none on earth equal to me in an encounter with the mace. in battle, am sankarshanas equal will certainly slay bhima, bhishma, etc every one of these is singly capable of slaying the paandavas. he alluded to the superhuman circumstances concerning bhishma, etc to the resolution of the samshaptakas to slay arjuna or be slain by him our chief warriors are bhishma, etc. they have seven akshauhinis, we have eleven brihaspati has said, that an army which is less by one third ought to be encountered . at the request of duryodhana, sanjaya described the chariots of arjuna, yudhishthira, bhimasena, sahadeva, nakula and excellent steeds, presented by the celestials, carry the sons of subhadraa and draupadi . at the request of dhritaraashtra, sanjaya mentioned the allies of the paandavas, krishna, etc and who had been assigned to each of them as his share shikhandin bhishma yudhishthira the madra king bhimasena duryodhanas sons and brothers, the rulers of the east and the south arjuna karna, jayadratha, etc. the five kekayas the kekayas, maalavas, shaalvakas, trigartau samshaptakau abhimanyu duryodhanas sons, dushaasanas sons, king brihadbala draupadeyaa dhrishtadyumna drona cekitaana somadatta saatyaki kritavarman sahadeva shakuni nakula uluka, saarasvataa. all the other kings had been distributed in their respective shares. thus the paandava host had been distributed into divisions. viraata with all his matsya warriors would support shikhandin. dhritaraashtra was exceedingly afraid of yudhishthira, etc duryodhana said that bhishma, etc. were invincible. dhritaraashtra maintained that bhishma did not wish a battle. sanjaya said that dhrishtadyumna was always urging the paandavas to fight, and professed that he would alone encounter all the assembled kings bhishma, etc and his words were approved by yudhishthira dhrishtadyumna had told sanjaya to say to the kurus, etc that they ought not to suffer themselves to be slain by arjuna, who was protected by the celestials they should send a good man to yudhi shthira and entreat him to accept the king. . dhritaraashtra men tioned that yudhishthira led the brahmacarya mode of life from his very youth, and saying that he himself, etc. did not applaud war, he urged duryodhana to desist from hostilities and give back to the paandavas their king, saying, that it was karna, dushaasana, and shakuni who led duryodhana astray. duryodhana answered that, without depending upon dhritaraashtra, etc he and karna and dushaasana would perform, in honour of yama, a sacrifice in battle and slay the paandavas he said that he would sacrifice his life rather than surrender to the paandavas even that much of land which may be covered by the sharp point of a needle. dhritaraashtra said that he abaned duryodhana for ever, and grieved for the kings who would be crushed by yuyudhaana, etc. . at the request of dhrita raashtra, sanjaya related how he had entered the inner apart ments in order to inform arjuna and krishna he had seen two straight lines on arjunas foot soles. krishna had threatened the kurus, mentioning that krishnaa had in voked him with tears, and that as men, y g and n. were incapable of encountering arjuna in battle, and alluding to his exploits in the city of viraata . dhritaraashtra represented to duryodhana that agni would help arjuna, remembering what was e to him at khaandava, that dharma, etc would help the paandavas from parental affection, that arjuna took up arrows at a time, that bhishma, etc. regarded him as invincible, and said he desired peace . duryodhana, inflamed with wrath, said that according to vyaasa, naarada, and parashu raama, the gods never engaged in work if agni, vaayu, dharma, indra, or the ashvins had ever engaged in work, the paarthas could never have fallen into distress, and they and the maruts would not venture to protect his foes charmed by me, agni will be instantly extinguished.. my energy is greater than that of the gods...it is who set agoing all the affairs of both gods and asuras... neither . nor g nor as. nor raa. are capable of saving him who has incurred my displeasure... thou wilt hear of the defeat of the paandavas, etc. ...whatever knowledge of weapons there is in bhishma, etc exists in me as well . karna said to duryodhana, mentioning the curse of parashu raama, when he, by a lie, obtained the braahma weapon from him, that he would slay the paancaalas, etc. . bhishma mentioned the khaandava forest, and said that the dart which karna had got from indra, would be reduced to ashes by krishna with his discus, and that his other shaft, which he respectfully wor shipped with flowery garlands, would be destroyed by arjuna because he was protected by krishna. karna made the pledge not to fight before bhishmas fall, and went to his own abode. bhishma ridiculed karnas boasting before the kings of avanti, etc. . duryodhana boasted vidura praised self restraint . vidura related that once two birds had flown away with the net in which they were caught, but were again caught when they began to quarrel. so it is also with kinsmen. once we, with some hunters and brahmans conversant with magic and charms, repaired to the northern mountain gandhamaadana, with excellent medicinal herbs, and inhabited by si. and g. there was, on a pre cipice, some honey, kuberas favourite drink, guarded by poisonous snakes the brahmans said that a mortal drinking of it would win immortality, a sightless man obtain sight, and an old man would become a youth. the hunters desired to obtain it, and all perished. so it is with duryodhana. in a single chariot arjuna conquered the whole earth bhishma and drona, etc. were routed by him at the city of viraata. remember also drupada and the king of the matsyas . dhritaraashtra warned duryodhana against the paandavas, etc and recommended him to follow bhishma, etc. as his guides, mentioning the combat at the city of viraata . at the request of dhritaraashtra, sanjaya related that arjuna had said that bhishma, etc. were all on the eve of death, if they did not give up to yudhishthira his own share of the king . as duryodhana showed little regard for the words of sanjaya, and the rest remained silent, the assembled kings rose and retired. dhritaraashtra, who always followed the counsels of his son, began to inquire in secret of sanjaya about the resolves of his own party and of the foes. sanjaya caused him to let vidura introduce vyaasa and gaandhaari . sanjaya extolled krishna, and mentioned some of those whom he had vanquished . discourse between dhritaraashtra and sanjaya on the attributes of krishna. dhritaraashtra told duryodhana to seek refuge with krishna. duryodhana refused. dhritaraashtra complained of him to gaandhaari. gaandhaari threatened duryodhana with bhimasena. vyaasa recommended to dhritaraashtra to seek salvation through krishna. requested by dhritaraashtra, sanjaya explained the path of salvation through krishna . at the request of dhritaraashtra, sanjaya enumerated some names of krishna . dhritaraashtra complained that he could not see krishna, whom he extolled under several names .
yaaska, a rishi. b, .
yati1, son of nahusha .
yati2, a son of vishvaamitra. b, .
yaatudhaana, pl a class of demons อด, . f, . do sg .
yaatudhaani, a hag, created by vrishadarbha. b, .
yaudheya, son of yudhishthira and devikaa .
yaudheya, pl a people .
yaudhishthira, pl. .
yaudhishthira, adj. .
yauga v. yoga, pl.
yauna, pl. = yavana, pl .
yauyudhaani, son of saatyaki .
yavakrita, a rishi, son of bharadvaaja . bhaaradvaaja2, yavakri, yavakri, yavakrin.
. . the learned raibhya and the rishi bharadvaaja were friends. raibhya had two learned sons, arvaavasu and paraavasu bharadvaaja only one son, yavakrita. as yavakrita saw that raibhya and his sons were esteemed by the brahmans, while bharadvaaja was slighted, he practised austerities in order to acquire vedic knowledge for himself and his father instead of acquiring it from a teacher during a long time. indra was alarmed, and twice he in vain attempted to make yavakrita desist from his penances, saying that they never could be successful. as yavakrita declared that he would cut off his limbs and sacrifice them in the fire, indra assumed the guise of an old decrepit brahman, and began to throw up a dam of sand at that spot of the bhaagirathi where yavakrita used to bathe, and declared that yavakritas intentions were equally im possible. then yavakrita desisted from his plan, and indra granted him that the vedas should be revealed to him and his father, and that he should excel other men. bharadvaaja said that yavakrita would become proud and uncharitable and thence destruction would soon overtake him, and told him some gaathaas, narrated by the gods, about medhaavin . . bharadvaaja made yavakrita promise to shun the irritable raibhya and his sons, and yavakrita began to offend other rishis . once, in the month of maadhava, he came to the hermitage of raibhya and seduced the wife of paraavasu. when raibhya came home and saw what had happened, he offered in the fire two matted locks of his hair, whence sprang out a woman resembling his daughter in law, who robbed yavakrita of his water pot, and a rakshas, who flew at him with his uplifted spear, as he had been deprived of his water pot and rendered unclean . yavakrita fled to a tank and then to all the rivers, and, finding them all devoid of water, he attempted to enter into the agnihotra room of his father, but was stopped at the r by a blind shudra warder, and killed by the rakshas. the rakshas, with the permission of raibhya, began to live with the female . when bharadvaaja returned home, the sacrificial fires, which used to welcome him every did not come forward to welcome him. having heard from the shudra what had happened, he cursed raibhya, saying that he should be killed by his eldest son. he cremated yavakrita, and then himself entered the fire . at that time king brihaddyumna, the yaajya of raibhya, employed arvaavasu and paraavasu at a sacrifice, while raibhya stayed at home with the wife of paraavasu. one day paraavasu, returning home to see his wife, met in the darkness his father in the wood wrapped in the skin of a black antelope, and, mistaking him for a deer, killed him. then, after having performed the funeral rites of his father, he prevailed upon arvaavasu to observe the vow prescribed in the case of killing a brahman, while he himself conducted the sacrifice alone. when arvaavasu came back, having observed the vow, paraavasu caused him to be driven away from the sacrifice as a slayer of a brahman. the brahmarshi arvaavasu went to the wood, and, applying to the sun, he practised austerities and mastered the rahasyaveda of the sun. the sun appeared to him in his embodied form, and said the gods were pleased by him. they elected arvaavasu and rejected paraavasu. the gods agni, etc granted him the boon that raibhya, bharadvaaja, and yavakrita revived, that paraavasu was absolved from his sin, that raibhya did not recollect his having been slain, and that the saura veda should attain celebrity . the gods explained to yavakrita that raibhya had been able to kill him because he had acquired his knowledge with great exertion and in the course of a long time, while yavakrita had learnt the vedas without exertion and without a guru. then indra and the gods returned to heaven .
yavakshaa, a river .
yavana1, pl a people. c, . b, . yauna, pl.
yavana2, sg. . b, .
yavana3, v. cyavana2 .
yaavana, adj. .
yavanaadhipa, one or more princes .
yavya, pl a kind of rishis, .
yaayaata, adj. .
yayaati, an ancient king, son of nahusha bis . having, after, years, been attacked with decrepitude, y. asked his sons, one by one, to give him their youth and take upon them his decrepitude, but only the youngest, puru, yielded to his wish, and taking upon himself the old age of y. he ruled the king, while y as strong as a tiger, enjoyed the company of his two wives and, in the caitra ratha wood, of vishvaaci, but without becoming satiated. he then recited some verses and took back from his son his own decrepitude, giving him back his youth. he then installed puru on the throne, saying that he was his true heir, and should continue the lineage which should be named after him. y. then retired to bhrigutunga, and having spent a long time in ascetism, observing the vow of fasting, he died and ascended to heaven with his wives, . y. transferred his decrepitude to puru, etc. and cursed his other sons, yadu, turvasu, druhyu, anu . y. sported with vishvaaci in the nandana wood and in alakaa, and in the northern summit of meru. y. then recited some verses and installed puru as king . the offspring of yadu, turvasu, druhyu, anu, and puru, . having installed puru on the throne, y. entered the wood to lead the life of a hermit for, years and then ascended to svarga, where he was reverenced by the gods, the saadhyas, the maruts, and the vasus, wandering about in devaloka and brahmaloka. one day indra asked him what he had said to puru when he bestowed the king upon him. y. answered that he had said the whole country between the gangaa and the yamunaa is thine, this is the central region of the earth, the outlying regions will be the inions of thy brothers. those without anger are ever superior to those under its sway, etc. . as y. said that he did not know his equal in ascetic austerities among men, gods, gandharvas, and maharshis, indra declared that, owing to this haughtiness, he should fall from heaven, yet he should fall among the virtuous. when falling, he was beheld by the raajarshi ashtaka, of whom he was the maternal grandfather y. spoke disapprovingly of haughtiness, etc and told that, leaving earth, he had obtained many high regions for, years, then he had dwelt in the town of indra for, years, then for, years in the world of prajaapati, then in the abode of devadeva he had also dwelt in nandana for ayutas of years, assuming any form at will, sporting with the apsarases then there had come a messenger of the gods with a grim visage, who thrice had shouted to him fall then he had fallen from nandana, hearing, while falling, the compassionate exclamations of the gods, who had directed him to fall to the sacrificial place of ashtaka and his companions . y. continued those who speak of their own merits after having dwelt for, or, years in heaven, are med to suffer the pains of the hell called bhauma, and are attacked by certain raakshasas with sharp teeth. y. then taught the lore of transmigration and emancipation . y. explained the duties of grihasthas, bhikshus, brahmacaarins, and vaanaprasthas, and the different kinds of munis and mauna . y. then said now shall fall into the bhauma hell, the lokapas of brahmaan hasten me thither. the kings ashtaka, pratardana, vasu manas aushadashvi, and shibi aushinara, offered him their lokas and volunteered to go to hell in his place y. did not accept the offer. then appeared five golden chariots, in which they all five ascended to heaven, shibi leaving the others behind him. y. told them that he was their maternal grandfather, that he had given the whole earth with her horses, etc to brahmans, and that the earth and the firmament and fire existed owing to his truth . c y. competed with indra. on the place where he performed his sacrifice the ground is studded with places for the sacrificial fires of various forms, and the earth seems subsiding under the pressure of y.s pious works, . maarkandeya continued once when king y. naahusha was sitting on his throne, there came a brahman who asked him for wealth for his preceptor, with whom he had made the appointment always to question the giver with what feelings he would give him what he asked for. y. answered that he always felt happy when giving, etc and gave him, kine, . as y. was falling headlong towards the earth, while the kings and si. and aps. laughed, there came, at the command of indra, a person whose business it was to hurl n those whose merits were exhausted, and told him that his pride had caused his fall. y. uttered the wish that he might fall among the righteous. he fell n among his daughters sons pratardana, vasumanas, shibi, and ashtaka, in the naimisha wood, where they performed a vaajapeya sacrifice. they gave him their merits, and the result of all their sacrifices. maadhavi also came and gave him the moiety of hers, likewise gaalava, who gave him the eighth part of his . as soon as y. was recognized by those virtuous persons, he rose again to heaven without touching the surface of the earth, and his four daughters sons, in a loud voice, repeated the gift of their merits . y. was honoured in heaven by g aps . r, r. ri, and the gods. brahmaan explained to him that it was his vanity alone that had been able to destroy all his merit . naarada continued such was the distress into which y. fell in consequence of vanity and gaalava owing to his obstinacy. make peace with the sons of paandu, . b y the son of nahusha, was the sixth in descent from soma. y. had five sons yadu, the son of devayaani, and thus the grandson of shukra kaavya was the eldest, while puru, the son of sharmishthaa was the youngest. yadu humiliated all the kshatriyas. he did not obey the injunc tions of his father, but insulted his father and brothers. he established himself in the city named after the elephant . y. cursed him and expelled him from the king. he also cursed his other sons who were obedient to yadu, and placed his youngest son, puru, on the throne, . y the son of nahusha, performed raajasuya sacrifices, he gave to the brahmans the whole of the wealth in the possession of mlecchas, etc. he sided with the gods against the asuras having divided the earth into four parts, he gave it away to four persons . his wives were devayaani, daughter of ushanas, and sharmishthaa he roved through the celestial woods, at last he installed puru on the throne and retired into the forest, . e, . b, . b, . b, . . b, . b, . b, . also the following synonyms naahusha, . nahushaatmaja, . sarvakaashisha, .
yayaatipatana, name of a tirtha .
. . vaishampaayana promised to recite the genealogy of prajaapati daksha, manu vaivasvata, bharata, kuru, puru, aajamidha, the yaadavas, the kauravas, and the bharatas. daksha. manu vaivasvata. pururavas. nahusha. yayaati. kaca. devayaani. yayaati.
yaayaavara, pl a family of brahmans .
yodhya, pl a people .
yoga1, name of a certain system of philosophy and religious practice . b, . b, . d, . g, . b, .
yoga2, mostly pl . do. sg. = shiva, . do. sg. = vishnu .
yoga4, a rishi .
yogaatman, said of shiva, krishna, purusha, surya, vyaasa, the yogin in general .
yogin, sg. or pl do. said of certain persons arjuna2, shiva, ci, vishnu, naaraayana
yoni, a tirtha .
yonidvaara, a tirtha .
yotimatsaka, v. potimatsaka.
yudhaamanyu, a paancaala, brother of uttamaujas อด, อด, . paancalaja, paancaalya, dual, saumaki.
yudhishthira paandava, also named ajaatashatru and dharmaraaja, eldest son of paandu and kunti . b kunti bore y. under the conjunction of jyeshthaa at the eighth muhurta, named abhijita divaamadhyagate surye tithau purne tipujite . an incorporeal voice foretold his greatness, . d y. excelled everyone in driving, . bis, . maarkandeya told y. various legends, . . maarkandeya told y. the story of raama daasharathi, อด, . . .
yudhishthiraashvaasa . maarkandeya consoled yudhi shthira, reminding him of raamas victory over raavana by means of monkeys and bears thou acts as a kshatriya and has no sin, even the gods, with indra and the asuras, must endure the same it was after such affliction that indra, with the maruts, slew vritra, namuci, and the raakshasi dirghajihvaa arjuna, bhimasena, nakula, and sahadeva are capable of vanquishing indra with the maruts jayadratha, who abducted krishnaa, was vanquished .
yugandhara1, name of a place .
yugandhara2, a paandava warrior .
yugandhara3, pl a people .
yugapa, a gandharva .
yuvanaashva, an ancient king . b, . saudyumni.
yuvaraajaa cedinaam, .
yuyutsu, son of dhritaraashtra and a vaishyaa among eleven sons of dhritaraashtra who are mahaarathasamshaavat.d vaishyaa putra...dhaartaraashtra shataadhikavaishyaa putra...dhaartaraashtra shataadhikagaandhaari putrotpattikarana, born from a vaishyaavaishyaaputradushalotpattidhritaraashtraputranaamak.enumeration of the sons of dhritaraashtra, .drupadashaasanasvayam varap.came to the svayamvara of draupadi, .draupadiparitaapav.sanjayayaanap.vaishyaa putrayaanasandhip.according to nil.bhagavadyaanap.ulukadutaaga manap.toyam, sc. purushodudhim, i.e. the army of duryodhana, only c.bhishmavadhap.joined the paandavasdronaabhishekap.f at vaaranaavata many wrathful kings battling together for six months, desiring to slay y could not vanquish himsamcaptakavadhap.cf proceeded against drona, description of his horsesfought with his brother subaahu fought with the elephant of bhagadattapratijnaap.kauravyamkarnap.o kaancana dhvajavanquished by ulukaattacked karnaattacked vasushenahradapraveshap.returned to haastinapuragadaayuddhap.jalapradaanikap.shraaddhap.among those whom yudhishthira ordered to perform the funeral rites for the dead warriorsraajadh.accompanied yudhishthiradhaartaraashtrasyaproceeded to see bhishmasvargaaro hanik. p.present when bhishma ascended to heavenanugitaap.kauravya, all. to the battlekauravyam...dhrtaraashtrajam, remained in haastinapura while the paandavas fetched the gold, aashramavaasap.vaishyaaputraremained in haastinapura while the paandavas visited dhritaraashtra, etc.naaradaagamanap.performed the funeral rites for dhritaraashtra, etc.mahaaprasthaanikap.vaishyaaputre, yudhishthira made over the king to y parikshit being installed on the thronethe son of a vaishyaayyyyyonly b.yy
